Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast,
where we discuss science and science-based tools
for everyday life.
I'm Andrew Huberman,
and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology
at Stanford School of Medicine.
Today, we are going to talk all about
healthy and disordered eating.
And indeed, we are going to talk about
clinical eating disorders,
such as anorexia, bulimia, and binge eating disorder,
as well as some other related eating disorders.
However, before we get into this material,
I want to emphasize that today's discussion
will include what it is to have
a healthy relationship with food.
We're going to talk about metabolism.
We're going to talk about how eating frequency
and what one eats influences things like appetite
and satiety, as well as whether or not
we have a healthy psychological relationship to food
and our body weight and so-called body composition,
the ratio of muscle to fat to bone, et cetera.
So as we march into this conversation,
I'd like to share with you some interesting
and what I believe are important findings
in the realm of nutrition and human behavior.
I know these days, many people are excited about
or curious about so-called intermittent fasting.
Intermittent fasting is, as the name implies,
simply restricting one's feeding behavior,
eating to a particular phase of the 24 hour
or so-called circadian cycle.
Other forms of intermittent fasting involve
not eating for extended periods of time,
for entire days, or some people will extend
to two days or three days, typically,
and hopefully they will drink water during those times,
sometimes referred to as water fasting,
which means that they are ingesting fluids
and hopefully they are ingesting electrolytes
such as salt, potassium, and magnesium as well,
because while one can survive for some period of time
without ingesting calories, it is extremely important
to continue to ingest plenty of fluids and electrolytes.
And the reason for that is that the neurons
of your brain and body that control your movements,
your thoughts, clarity of thinking in general, et cetera,
is critically dependent on the presence
of adequate levels of sodium, potassium, and magnesium,
the electrolytes, and that's because neurons
can only be electrically active by way of movement
of particular ions, which include things like sodium,
potassium, and magnesium.
So without those, you can't think, you can't function,
and it actually can be quite dangerous.
So why all the excitement about intermittent fasting?
Well, a lot of the excitement relates to work
that was done by a former colleague of mine
down at the Salk Institute for Biological Studies
in San Diego named Sachin Panda.
Sachin's lab identified some very important
and impactful health benefits
of restricting one's feeding window to particular times
within the 24-hour cycle, or even to having extended fasts
that go for a day or two days, or maybe even three days.
What they saw was an improvement in liver enzymes,
an improvement in insulin sensitivity,
which is something that is good.
It means that you can utilize the calories
and the blood sugar that you happen to have.
Being insulin-insensitive is not good
and is actually a form of diabetes.
What Sachin's lab and subsequently other labs showed
was that restricting one's feeding window
to anywhere from four to eight or even 12 hours
during each 24-hour cycle was beneficial in mice.
And some studies in humans have also shown
that it can be beneficial for various health parameters.
However, the excitement about intermittent fasting
seems to be related to the foundational truth
about metabolism and weight loss and weight maintenance
and weight gain, which is that regardless of whether or not
you intermittent fast or whether or not you eat small meals
all day long, or you eat one meal in the evening
and snack up until then, it really doesn't matter
in the sense that the calories that you ingest
from whatever source are going to be filtered
through the calories that you burn by way of exercise,
basal metabolic rate,
which is just the calories that you happen to burn,
just being alive and thinking and breathing
and your heart beating, et cetera.
And the reason why many people prefer intermittent fasting
to other forms of, let's just call it what it is,
diet or nutritional framework is that many people
find it easier to not eat than to limit their portion size.
And here I'm not talking necessarily about eating disorders,
I'm talking about the general population.
So I think that's one reason why there's so much excitement
about intermittent fasting.
Now, within the context of intermittent fasting
on a circadian timescale once every 24 hours,
you generally find two categories of people.
People who prefer to not eat in the morning,
either because they are not hungry in the morning
or because they find it relatively straightforward
to just drink things like coffee or water, et cetera,
and push their feeding window out to noon or 2 p.m.
or 3 p.m.
And then they'll eat between say 1 p.m. and 8 p.m.
or 9 p.m.
It depends on the individual.
Other groups of people find that they are very hungry
when they wake up in the morning.
They don't feel well if they don't eat breakfast.
And so they prefer to eat early in the day,
but then they limit their feeding window
such that they cut off their food intake
or stop ingesting any calories of any kind
somewhere around 5 p.m. or 6 p.m., et cetera.
So the duration of the feeding window
has not been broken down
into the kind of nuanced type of information
that one would really want,
at least not in human studies,
saying, well, a six-hour feeding window
or an eight-hour feeding window is ideal.
It really is going to vary
based on lifestyle and circumstances.
For instance, some families really want
to eat dinner together every night.
So do you want to be the person
that's sitting there watching everybody eat
because you're fasting from 5 p.m. onward?
I don't know.
That's an individual difference.
What you can start to identify, however,
is that people tend to fall
into either one category or the other,
people who prefer to skip eating in the morning
or people that prefer to
or manage to skip eating in the evening.
And there has been no evidence thus far
that one is better or worse,
at least in terms of weight loss or overall health parameters.
Now, you could imagine
that some people might eat breakfast and dinner.
And indeed, I have several, many colleagues, in fact,
who just choose to skip lunch
because they're busy during the day.
They eat breakfast and dinner.
That doesn't afford the long fast associated with sleep.
What do I mean by that?
Well, if you went to sleep at 11 p.m.
and you wake up at 6 a.m.
by extending your fast until 1 p.m. in the afternoon,
you get quite a long period of no ingesting any calories.
Whereas when you don't eat during the middle of the day,
you are getting a fasting period
that's probably anywhere from four to seven hours,
but it's not linked to the longer fasting period
of not eating while you are asleep
because most all people, and I want to emphasize most,
do not eat while they are asleep.
But we are going to talk about an eating disorder
that does exist where people actually eat in their sleep.
I know it sounds pretty wild,
but indeed that eating disorder does exist
and has a very interesting underlying mechanism.
So why are we talking about this?
And in particular, why are we talking about this
during an episode that includes a discussion
about eating disorders?
The reason is nobody, not the government,
no nutritionists, no individual,
no matter how knowledgeable they are
about food and nutrition and food intake,
can define the best plan for eating for any one individual.
I'm going to repeat that.
Nobody knows what truly healthy eating is.
We only know the measurements we can take.
Liver enzymes, blood lipid profiles, body weight,
athletic performance, mental performance,
whether or not you're cranky all day,
whether or not you're feeling relaxed,
nobody knows how to define these.
And these have strong cultural and familial
and socio societal influence.
So if you hang out with people
that intermittent fast all day, that will seem normal.
If you spend time with people
that have never heard of intermittent fasting,
intermittent fasting is going to seem very abnormal.
Now we are going to talk about eating disorders
that really fall into the category
of clinically diagnosable eating disorders
for which there's actually serious health hazards
and even the serious risk of death.
We will get to that topic.
But for the time being, I want to emphasize
a new set of findings
that I think many people will find interesting
and at least will want to consider
in light of their current nutritional plan
or pattern of eating,
whether or not you're intermittent fasting or not.
And I want to cue up an important framework
for the rest of the conversation
on healthy and disordered eating,
which includes an understanding of thinking,
decision-making and what we call homeostatic processes,
meaning regulation of things
that are going on in our brain and body
and reward mechanisms.
I'm going to return to that in a moment.
But first I want to share with you these new findings
that were just published in the journal Cell Reports,
a cell press journal, excellent journal.
This was a study that was performed both in mice
and it included a crossover study with a human population.
The human population was women,
but it relates to a previous study
that was also carried out in men.
I'm going to simplify this study.
We will provide a link to the full study
so you can explore it in more detail.
And if you're really excited about the results,
I would encourage you to explore some of the references
within that paper as well.
What was the study?
The study looked at giving mice or humans two meals
and explored whether or not putting those meals
early in the day or late in the day
had an impact on muscle hypertrophy,
muscle growth and overall protein synthesis of muscle.
So when we eat the amino acids from various foods
are broken down and synthesized
into different types of tissues.
They can be utilized for energy,
burned up for moving about and thinking, et cetera,
or it can be synthesized,
those amino acids can be synthesized into skeletal muscle,
the sorts of skill to muscles
that allow you to move your limbs.
This study explored how protein intake,
which included what are called branch chain amino acids
and amino acids like leucine,
which are important for muscle protein synthesis.
It explored whether or not emphasizing or skewing
the protein intake toward early day or late day
was better in terms of muscle hypertrophy.
And they also looked at some parameters of strength
like grip strength.
Now mice are nocturnal.
So before you say, wait, mice are nocturnal,
how did they look during the day?
And it's completely, it doesn't apply because it's in mice.
Of course, they knew that.
And they looked during the mice's active phase
of their circadian cycle, which corresponds to our day.
And in humans, they looked at whether or not
eating most of one's protein early in the day
was better than if the protein intake
and these branch chain amino acids
were placed later in the day.
And yes, they had the mice do resistance training.
They did that by emphasizing overload
to one limb of the mouse.
And that actually generates hypertrophy.
It's a form of resistance training in mice.
So they don't have them weight training.
They weren't doing curls and dips and squats
and things of that sort.
They were moving their own body weight,
but they skewed that distribution of body weight
by restricting a limb and forcing them to use one limb
that did indeed grow in response to that.
And then in humans, there was an exploration of grip strength
and then with resistance training,
that was also carried out through a peripheral study.
Basically the takeaway from this study
was that mice and humans can utilize amino acids
that are ingested early in the day
better than they can utilize amino acids
ingested later in the day,
in particular toward muscle hypertrophy and growth
or maintenance of muscle,
which for those of you that aren't interested
in much muscle hypertrophy,
that aren't trying to grow your muscles,
I've talked before in the episode
on building strength and hypertrophy,
that maintaining muscle,
regardless of one's athletic prowess,
regardless of one's age is extremely important
because loss of skeletal muscle
is one of the major causes of injury as we age.
It's one of the major causes, believe it or not,
of cognitive and metabolic deficits as we age.
So maintaining muscle is important,
building muscle might be important to some of you,
but what they found was ingesting protein early in the day
and these amino acids early in the day
led to more muscle hypertrophy
than if the majority of amino acids and proteins
were ingested late in the day.
So this translates to intermittent fasting
such that if you are interested in muscle hypertrophy,
you might, and I want to emphasize might,
consider making sure that you're getting
sufficient protein intake early in the day.
What sources of protein you use
is going to be highly individual.
Some of you are meat eaters,
some of you don't eat red meat,
some of you eat chicken and fish and eggs,
some of you don't, some of you are vegans.
It has been shown that the amino acid leucine
is vital for the cell growth process,
including muscle growth because of its relationship
to the so-called mTOR pathway,
mammalian target of rapamycin.
We can talk about that more if you like in a future episode.
This means that if you're somebody who wants to maintain
or increase the amount of muscle mass that you have,
ingesting a high protein meal early in the day
ought to be beneficial for that.
Does it mean that you should not eat protein
in the afternoon and evening?
No, I think a lot of people
might've misinterpreted this study
and I don't want that to happen.
This is only pointing out the fact
that ingesting sufficient quality amino acids,
including leucine, early in the day
can be beneficial for maintenance
and growth of muscle tissue.
It does not say that you should avoid protein
later in the day.
Now for you intermittent fasters, this could be relevant.
I, for instance, was somebody who for a very long time
skipped breakfast.
My first meal of the day would be in the early afternoon,
mostly protein and salad, in my case, animal protein,
because that's in alignment with my values.
Then in the evening, I would eat pasta, vegetables, et cetera.
I might have some protein, some small piece of fish
or chicken or something like that,
but I didn't really emphasize that.
On the basis of these results, I am experimenting with,
I want to emphasize experimenting with,
I haven't completely tossed out my old protocol,
but I'm experimenting with eating proteins early in the day
and eating lunch.
And then dinner might be a light supper of some sort,
but not so much protein later in the evening.
Again, if you want to eat six meals a day,
you want to eat around the clock, I'm not going to stop you.
I'm not telling anybody what to do.
As I mentioned earlier, nobody knows exactly how to eat
for one's particular goals.
But this study was really interesting
because it really did show that we can utilize the proteins
that are ingested early in the day better
than we can utilize the proteins
that are ingested later in the day.
And of course, there will be factors that can shift that.
For instance, if you work out very hard
with resistance training later in the day,
resistance training is known to increase protein synthesis.
So it stands to reason that ingesting amino acids
after that training would be beneficial.
However, in the study, it did not seem to matter
when the resistance training fell
within the 24 hour schedule.
The morning ingestion or early day ingestion of amino acids
seemed to be beneficial.
How early?
Between the hours of about 5 a.m. and 10 a.m. for humans.
Now, just a bit of mechanism to explain why this happens.
So why would it be that ingesting protein early in the day
would lead to more synthesis of muscle
than ingesting protein later in the day?
And the reason it turns out is related
to the circadian clock mechanism
that is present in all cells, including muscle cells.
So muscles have fibers.
I think most people are aware of that,
that your muscles are not just one big blob of tissue.
A lot of these little fibers that contract.
Within those fibers, however, there are cells with nuclei.
Those nuclei contain DNA.
DNA is transcribed into RNA.
RNA is translated into proteins.
The DNA of your cells, including these muscle cells,
are under strong circadian regulation.
Each one has a pattern of gene expression
that is different at different times
during the 24 hour cycle.
This is an unescapable reality of all cells in your body,
right from your hair cells to your brain cells
to your retinal cells, to your toe on both feet.
These cells make a gene called BMAL.
BMAL, B-M-A-L, is a clock gene.
And the expression of this clock gene
varies across the 24 hour cycle.
And proteins that are downstream of this BMAL gene
influence protein synthesis.
The circadian regulation of this BMAL gene
turns out to be vitally important
for this protein synthesis mechanism.
How do we know that?
Well, in this particular study,
because they had a mouse that lacked BMAL,
the gene was knocked out.
They had a bunch of these mice.
They were able to explore whether or not
this early day feeding effect was present or absent
in these mice that lack the gene BMAL.
And indeed it was absent.
In other words, the effect of increased protein synthesis
early in the day was eliminated
in the absence of the BMAL gene.
So what this means is that when you wake up in the morning,
assuming you're following a standard schedule
of being asleep at night and awake during the day,
your muscle cells are primed to incorporate amino acids
and synthesize muscle,
regardless of whether or not you weight train
the night before at 8 p.m.
where you don't weight train at all
or you weight train afterwards or before.
I said 5 to 10 p.m. is the sort of critical window
for this increased protein synthesis.
All this means is that if you are interested
in maintaining or enhancing muscle tissue volume,
that you might want to consider eating quality protein
and amino acids early in the day.
You could train first, you could train after,
you could not train at all.
That's a entirely different discussion.
What is quality protein?
Well, quality protein is going to be a protein
that includes most of the essential amino acids
and in particular, leucine.
Now there's a lot of debate as to whether or not
you can get all the essential amino acids
from a purely plant-based diet
or whether or not you need to ingest
animal-based foods or not.
The term quality protein
has no strict scientific definition.
Some people define quality protein as a protein
that has a high essential amino acid to caloric ratio.
Now, what that means is a small piece of chicken or steak
or eggs, for instance, will have many essential amino acids
with a low caloric content relative to say beans
or plant-based foods that can also get you
essential amino acids, but it requires more calories
to access those essential amino acids.
Now that's a debate that has many exceptions and nuances.
And I, for one, am perfectly respectful of the folks
that just want to ingest plant-based foods
in order to get their high quality protein.
I think that actually can be done.
One has to be careful and thoughtful in their choices
about how to do that.
So this really isn't about animal-based
versus non-animal-based foods.
This is about getting quality amino acids early in the day
from whatever foods are in alignment
with your particular values in your particular eating plan.
So that's a lot of information,
but the key takeaways are every cell in your muscles
has a clock gene.
The clock genes vary such that protein synthesis
is greater early in the day than it is later in the day,
such that in both mice and in humans,
ingestion of quality proteins early in the day
will be more so incorporated into muscle
than the proteins that are ingested late in the day.
And of course, there are the caveats of
if you're training hard late in the day,
if you're adjusting your hormone status
through whatever mechanism, et cetera,
protein synthesis can also be high later in the day.
But for most people, it's going to taper off
due to this circadian B-mal gene-related mechanism.
Again, we will provide a link to the study.
And the other key takeaways were that nobody knows,
nobody can tell you what healthy feeding windows are,
what the best feeding windows are.
There's absolutely no information in that context.
You talk to 10 nutritionists or academics or trainers
or individuals about what healthy eating is,
and you are going to get vastly different answers.
And that's one of the reasons why I believe that
the internet, in particular social media,
are so filled with contradictory opinions.
But the calories in versus calories burned formula
is the more or less holy foundation of all things
about nutrition, eating, and weight.
And as we transition today into the discussion
about eating disorders, I'd like you to keep this in mind
because for the treatment of eating disorders,
it doesn't matter what psychological
or early trauma-based effects led to the eating disorder
if the person isn't adjusting their feeding behavior
in a way that is going to ameliorate the symptoms
of that disorder, which is ultimately the goal.
Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast
is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford.
It is, however, part of my desire and effort
to bring zero cost to consumer information about science
and science-related tools to the general public.
In keeping with that theme,
I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast.
Our first sponsor is Belcampo.
Belcampo is a regenerative farm in Northern California
that raises organic, grass-fed,
and finished certified humane meats.
I don't eat a lot of meat,
but I eat meat about once a day.
That means a small piece of steak or chicken, et cetera,
and usually a salad.
I usually do that for breakfast or for lunch.
And then in the evening,
I tend to follow a more or less vegetarian diet.
I tend to eat pastas and vegetables and things of that sort.
While I don't eat a lot of meat,
it's important that the meat that I eat
be of very high quality and that I am certain
that the animals were raised and treated humanely
up until the point of slaughter.
Belcampo's animals graze on open pastures
and seasonal grasses their entire lives,
resulting in meat that's higher in nutrients
and healthy fats.
It also results in healthy, happy cows.
I often talk about how important omega-3 fatty acids are.
They've been shown to be important for regulating mood,
for the microbiome, for restricting inflammation in the brain
and elsewhere in the body.
Belcampo's meats are known to be high in omega-3s.
And given that the meat is grass-fed and grass-finished,
that combines all the features of the nutrition
and the animal wellbeing that I want to see
for any meat that I ingest.
If you'd like to try Belcampo,
first-time customers can get 20% off
by going to belcampo.com slash Huberman
and using the code Huberman at checkout.
That's belcampo.com slash Huberman
for 20% off your first order.
Today's podcast is also brought to us by Headspace.
Headspace is a meditation app
that's backed by 25 published studies
and has over 600,000 five-star reviews.
I've been meditating for a very long time,
although I admit I meditate on and off,
meaning I'll go a few weeks or months,
meditating regularly, and then I tend to stop.
A few years ago, I got into a regular meditation practice
because I started using Headspace's meditation app.
The thing I really like about their meditation app
is it has meditations of different durations.
So sometimes I'll just meditate
for three minutes or five minutes,
or ideally I'm doing two 20-minute sessions per day,
but I confess I don't always manage that.
But they have a ton of different meditations
on the Headspace app that allow you
to tailor your meditation practice
to your particular schedule.
And there are now a plethora of studies
showing the benefits of a regular meditation practice.
If you want to try Headspace,
you can go to headspace.com slash special offer.
And if you do that, you'll get a free one-month trial
with Headspace's full library of meditations.
You get them all.
That's the best deal offered by Headspace right now.
So again, if you're interested, go to headspace.com
slash special offer.
Today's episode is also brought to us by Athletic Greens.
Athletic Greens is a vitamin mineral probiotic drink,
and it's one that I've been drinking since 2012.
The reason I started drinking Athletic Greens
and the reason I still take Athletic Greens
is that it really helps me cover all of my nutritional bases
with respect to vitamins and minerals and probiotics.
And we now know that a healthy gut microbiome
is supported by probiotics.
And for me, Athletic Greens is the best way
to get those probiotics.
I also ingest some fermented foods,
but by ingesting Athletic Greens,
I'm certain to get all the things I need.
And also I just feel better when I drink it.
I genuinely feel like I have more energy
and I just feel better.
And I happen to really like the way it tastes.
I mix mine with some water and some lemon juice.
And in doing that,
I'm certain to get all of my nutritional bases covered
and the probiotics support a healthy gut microbiome,
which is important for mood,
regulating inflammation and so on.
If you want to try Athletic Greens,
you can go to athleticgreens.com slash Huberman.
And if you do that, you can claim a special offer.
They'll give you five free travel packs
in addition to your Athletic Greens order.
Those travel packs make it really easy
to mix up Athletic Greens while you're on the road,
in the car, on the plane, et cetera.
And they will give you a year supply of vitamin D3, K2.
Vitamin D3 and K2 have been shown to be important
for blood lipid profiles, for metabolism,
and a whole bunch of other metabolic and neural processes.
So go to athleticgreens.com slash Huberman
to get the Athletic Greens, the five free travel packs,
and the year supply of D3 and K2.
So let's talk about eating disorders.
And as we do that, I want to emphasize again,
that nobody can really define what healthy eating is
with a single protocol.
However, there is some general agreement
about what unhealthy and disordered eating is.
There are clear criteria in the psychiatric
and psychological communities to define things
like anorexia, bulimia, binge eating disorder,
all of which we will talk about.
But as we have that discussion,
I want to emphasize that self-diagnosis
can be both a terrific, but also a very precarious thing.
We talked about this a little bit
in the episode about depression.
There's always a temptation,
as one learns about the symptomology of a given disorder,
doesn't really matter what the disorder is,
to ask the question, well, do I have that?
Does so-and-so that I know have that?
Ah, I see this sort of behavior or that pattern of thinking
in that individual.
It's tempting to diagnose them and or ourselves
as either having or not having a particular disorder.
However, diagnoses really need to be carried out
by people who are trained in that particular field
and that have deep expertise
in recognizing the symptomology,
including some of the more subtle symptomology
of eating disorders.
So if any of the symptoms resonate with you,
by way of you thinking that you have
this particular disorder or someone that you know
has a disorder, I would take that seriously,
but I would take that information
to a qualified healthcare professional
that could diagnose or rule out
any of these possible disorders.
I say that not to protect us, but to protect you,
because information is valuable.
And I do believe that knowledge of knowledge
can be very valuable in navigating any topic
and improving our thoughts and behaviors around that topic.
But one doesn't want to,
or I should say one shouldn't start to self-diagnose
simply on the basis of information
without running that through the filter
of a qualified professional.
So what is an eating disorder?
Well, we have to take a step back
and confess to the fact that every society, every culture,
every family and every individual
has a different relationship to food.
Eating disorders, however, have particular criteria
that allow us to define them
and to think about different modes of treatment
as it relates to the particular symptoms,
in particular the psychological
and biological symptoms of those disorders.
Now that's a mouthful, no pun intended.
What are the major eating disorders?
Anorexia nervosa, most commonly referred to as anorexia,
is perhaps the most prevalent
and the most dangerous of all eating disorders.
In fact, anorexia is the most dangerous
psychiatric disorder of all, even more than depression.
The probability of death for untreated anorexia
is very high.
And sadly, the prevalence of anorexia is very high.
So what is anorexia and how prevalent is it?
Anorexia, if you look it up online
or you talk to a qualified professional,
is essentially a failure to eat enough
to maintain a healthy weight.
You can see all sorts of very troubling symptoms
of somebody who's been anorexic for some period of time.
A general loss of muscle mass
because they're ingesting fewer calories than they burn.
Muscle is very metabolically active.
They tend to lose a lot of muscle mass.
They will have a low heart rate.
This is the body and brain's attempt to lower energy output.
They will have low blood pressure.
They will sometimes have symptoms like fainting.
They will have sometimes even hair growth on the face,
something called lanugo,
which is essentially the body's attempt to insulate the body
because of loss of body heat when you're that thin.
Loss of bone density, osteoporosis,
loss of periods in girls and women
and all sorts of disrupted gut and immune functions.
So there are just tons of terrible symptoms of anorexia
that really placed the anorexic into a very risky state,
which is why mortality from anorexia gone untreated
is extremely high.
Now, one of the misconceptions about anorexia
is that it stems from an overemphasis on perfectionism
or that because of all the images in social media
and in advertising of extremely thin and fit
or muscular people,
that individuals are looking at themselves
and comparing themselves to those images
and thinking that they don't match up
in developing anorexia.
That turns out to not be the case.
If you look at the prevalence or the rates of anorexia
in the last 10 years or 20 years,
and you compare that to when anorexia was first identified,
which was in the 1600s and perhaps even earlier,
what you find is that rates of anorexia are not going up.
So this idea that the images that we're being bombarded with
are causing anorexia doesn't seem to be true.
Now, that is not to say that the images
that we in particular young people are being bombarded with
are healthy for their psychological state of mind,
but classically defined anorexia
has existed as essentially the same prevalence
for the last 100, 200, 300 and 400 years,
which is incredible and really speaks to the likelihood
that there's a strong biological contribution
to what we call anorexia nervosa.
Anorexia nervosa is extremely common.
It's anywhere from one to 2% of women.
And the typical onset is in adolescence, close to puberty,
but it can show up later in life as well.
In fact, the identification and diagnosis of anorexia
tends to be in the early 20s,
but if you look back at the history of those individuals,
there were typically signs of anorexia
that stem back into their early teens
or maybe even before that.
Now, of course, men can be anorexic as well,
but anorexia nervosa does seem to occur
at 10 times the rate in women and young girls
than it does in men and young boys.
So while there does seem to be more of a prevalence
of anorexia in boys and young men these days,
that's probably due to better diagnosis and detection
than it is to some sort of societal shift
related to imagery, et cetera.
Later, we will talk about body dysmorphia
and some of the images that are present in media
and social media and how those are impacting
other forms of eating disorders.
But when you look at anorexia nervosa,
this failure to maintain weight, even to healthy levels
and often drops in weight that are very dangerous
or even deadly, that has existed for a very long time
and seems to be somewhat hardwired into the biology
of individuals that suffer from it.
Now, when I say hardwired, that doesn't mean
that it can't be treated or cured and indeed it can.
Bulimia, which is defined as binge eating or overeating,
let me explain what that is.
Binge eating is consuming vast amounts of calories
in a short period of time.
Overeating can be ingesting more calories than one needs,
but over an extended period of time,
both can exist, of course, but bulimia is also very common.
It's more common in young girls and in women
than it is in young boys and in men,
but it is present in both sexes.
Bulimia and rates of bulimia might be increasing.
That's sort of an interesting finding.
It's not quite clear whether or not it's existed
in its same form for a long period of time
or whether or not there are new forms that are evolving
or showing up.
We're going to drill into bulimia and what it actually is
and what it represents.
But one thing I want to be clear about,
just as the perfectionist mindset has been associated
with anorexia, and it turns out that's not the case.
It can be, but it's not always associated with anorexia.
There was the idea that bulimia is associated
with early trauma in childhood,
in particular sexual trauma.
And while that can be the case,
there's no direct correlation between the two.
Now, obviously psychological phenomena and trauma
can have a profound impact on the way that the brain
wires up and the way that people approach food
and other types of behaviors.
But the sort of classic idea was that all anorexics
are perfectionists, they want to perform well,
it's all about control and autonomy,
and bulimics are kind of dysregulated and acting out
against some early sexual trauma.
Those stereotypes of the psychological framework
of anorexics and bulimics doesn't hold up
when you look at the data.
Many meta analyses have been done,
it just simply is not the case.
And in both instances, both anorexia and bulimia,
there are clear biological underpinnings
to what's driving the undereating or the overeating.
So we're going to talk about the biology of undereating
and overeating and appropriate levels of eating.
And by doing that, we will start to identify
some of the mechanisms that serve as entry points
for the treatment of both anorexia and bulimia.
And as some of you are probably aware,
anorexia and bulimia can be comorbid,
they can exist with one another.
There are anorexics who will binge and then purge
in order to maintain that unhealthily low weight.
There are bulimics who fit the psychological criteria
of anorexia, and so there's a lot of overlap
between those two categories.
Now let's talk about the categorization for a second
and why the categorization has led to now
a bunch of other eating disorders
as defined by the psychiatric community.
One of the classic symptoms of anorexia
is a loss of menstrual cycles, loss of periods.
And the reason for that is when the body is undernourished,
the body fat stores send signals to the brain
to inform that the body is undernourished
or they turn off the signals that say,
look, there are enough body fat cells out here
to support healthy metabolism,
and therefore let's shut down ovulation.
Literally signals sent from the fat and muscle to the brain
and the brain, the hypothalamus and pituitary
will send signals down to the ovaries
or they will turn off the signals heading to the ovaries
to deploy eggs, the maturation of eggs
in the follicle, et cetera.
So there are instances in which people have anorexia
or have bulimia, but are still maintaining
healthy menstrual cycles, or at least menstrual cycles.
And that has led to a whole set of other categorizations
of eating disorders like binge eating disorder,
where there tends to be a lot of overeating,
but not the purging, or categorizations of anorexia
in which people are underfeeding,
but they are not losing their periods.
And so these have a number of different names and acronyms.
Some of them include things like EDNOS.
EDNOS is eating disorder, not otherwise specified.
So that's a sub-categorization or OSFEDS.
So OSFEDS is other specified feeding or eating disorder.
So right now, if you were to look online
or you're looking into the psychiatric
and psychological textbooks,
what you would find is that there's a huge constellation
of eating disorders.
Today, we're mainly going to talk about anorexia,
bulimia, binge eating disorder, and body dysmorphia.
You can even find eating disorders like pica,
where people actually ingest things like dirt
or rocks or metal because they have a genuine appetite
for those things.
I certainly do not recommend sampling
any of those non-food items as foods.
It is incredibly dangerous.
People often poison themselves.
They often can cause structural blockages.
Some people have died from those sorts of things,
but nonetheless, there are aspects of our brain and biology
that when disrupted can lead to very bizarre types
of eating behavior.
Sometimes pica is caused by malnutrition, but not always.
And so today we're going to focus
on the most prevalent eating disorders,
but we are going to build up toward that understanding
by looking at what healthy metabolism and eating
and satiety and hunger looks like.
Because one, I realized that not everyone out there
has an eating disorder.
And two, I want people to understand this relationship
between how they think,
the decisions they take about what they eat,
and how the body and the brain at subconscious levels
are driving some of these behaviors,
healthy or otherwise,
because I do think that it can lead us
to a better understanding of what healthy eating is
for most of us, and to increase compassion
and hopefully even increased improvement
in treatment of eating disorders for those
that are suffering from them.
So what is hunger and what is satiety?
Satiety, of course, being sated
or feeling like we've had enough food.
I want to remind people of the basic mechanisms
by which the brain and body communicate.
This is vitally important, not just for this discussion,
but for any discussion about how we think,
how we behave, how we feel.
The body is communicating two types of information
to the brain on a regular basis,
but in particular around feeding.
And those two types of information
are mechanical information and chemical information.
What do I mean by mechanical information?
Well, if you take a deep breath and you hold your breath,
what you'll find is that you can hold your breath
a lot longer than if you exhale all your air
and you hold your breath with lungs empty.
And the reason is not because when your lungs are full,
you have enough oxygen,
and therefore you can hold your breath.
It's because when your lungs are full,
a particular class of neurons called baroreceptors
send information to the brain
and say there's pressure in the lungs.
And that means that there's probably oxygen in here.
And so the trigger to breathe is actually suppressed.
When your lungs are empty,
even if you have plenty of oxygen in your system,
those baroreceptors send a different signal to the brain,
which is there's no oxygen in here and you should breathe.
And so the impulse to breathe comes earlier.
Likewise, when your stomach is full,
it sends signals to your brain
that are purely based on this mechanical fullness.
Has nothing to do with nutrients that says I'm full
and therefore don't be as hungry.
Don't motivate to find or ingest food.
Whereas when our gut is empty,
even if we have plenty of nutrients
or plenty of body fat stores,
we tend to focus on food a bit more.
So volume and mechanical influences have a profound effect
on how we think and what we consider doing or not doing.
Likewise, chemical effects.
When we ingest food,
our so-called blood sugar or blood glucose levels go up.
That information is signaled to the brain
via neuronal pathways and hormonal pathways.
And in particular, there are neurons within our gut
that signal to areas of our brainstem
that are involved in satiety in our sense of having enough
that there's food in our system.
So that's chemical information.
So how are hunger and feeding and satiety regulated
by way of mechanical and chemical signaling?
You have, I have, we all have neurons in our hypothalamus
that trigger eating and neurons that trigger cessation
or stopping of eating.
We have an accelerator on eating and we have a break.
And I covered all of this in a lot of detail
in the episode on feeding and metabolism and hunger.
So if you want a lot more detail, see that episode.
But right now, I'm just going to give you the top contour
of how all that works.
Your hypothalamus is an area of your forebrain,
which tells you it's in the front,
but it's at the base of your forebrain.
So it's more or less above the roof of your mouth.
The hypothalamus contains lots of different kinds of neurons,
including neurons that stimulate sexual activity and desire,
regulate your body temperature and control appetite
and ceasing of eating and appetite.
There are two types of neurons within a particular area
of your hypothalamus that are relevant here.
There are the so-called POMC neurons, okay?
Pro opioid melanocortin neurons that tend to act
as more of a break on appetite by way of another hormone
called melanocyte stimulating hormone.
And not so incidentally, when you're getting a lot
of sunlight and you're viewing a lot of sunlight,
that system is ramped up.
This is why appetite is lower in the summer months
than it is in the winter months.
This is true in animals, and this is true in humans.
And you have a class of neurons called the AGRP neurons.
The AGRP neurons are the ones that stimulate feeding
and they create a sort of anxiety or excitement about food.
It can be positive anxiety or it can be negative anxiety.
What do I mean by that?
Well, have you ever seen kids heading in to get ice cream?
They're absolutely excited.
You see people getting ready to sit down
and eat a big meal.
They're excited to eat.
Sometimes that's due to social factors,
but they have an increase in overall levels
of autonomic arousal.
And depending on the context,
they can feel excited or anxious,
but it is a ramping up of energy.
These AGRP neurons are what caused that.
In fact, so much so that if you eliminate
or kill these neurons, which has been done
in experimental mouse models in the laboratory,
but also there are humans that have lesions
or neurotoxic effects on these AGRP neurons.
And what you find is that they don't want to eat.
They essentially become anorexic,
meaning they don't want to ingest food.
They have no appetite for food whatsoever.
Now that's not exactly what anorexia is,
but these AGRP neurons are like an accelerator
on wanting to eat.
Whereas if you stimulate these AGRP neurons
or in humans that have say a small tumor
near these AGRP neurons, they become hyperphagic.
They will eat to the point of bursting.
Both animals and humans that have elevated levels
of these AGRP neurons are anxious.
They want to eat and they will ingest food
to the point where they override those mechanical
and chemical signals in the body.
And I know it sounds horrible and it is horrible.
They will eat until the point that they burst.
Now there are signals coming back from the body
to inform the brain about presence
of different levels of nutrients.
And that generally comes from three sources.
First of all, is body fat.
The more body fat we have,
the more we secrete a hormone called leptin,
L-E-P-T-I-N, leptin from body fat.
Leptin goes to the brain and suppresses appetite.
This is a body to brain signaling mechanism
that says, look, I've had enough.
Not incidentally, leptin signaling is disrupted
in people that have bulimia and obesity
and certain forms of binge eating disorder.
So that system is disrupted.
I've had enough signal or there's enough body fat here
such that you don't need to eat more.
Right here, I'm sort of in the voice of the body fat
trying to talk to the brain.
That signal, that dialogue is mixed up or messed up.
In some cases, it's absent entirely.
So the body fat is signaling to the brain
about how much reserve you have.
It's sort of like a savings account for energy
because that's what body fat is.
You got lipids in there and through lipolysis,
they can be metabolized.
If you're interested in that process,
both how to increase it and just generally how it works,
you can see the episode on the science of fat loss.
The body fat is doing something else really interesting
that relates to anorexia.
When there's sufficient levels of body fat
and leptin circulating in the blood
and that leptin signal gets to the brain,
the hypothalamus and the pituitary gland
register that signal and in a completely subconscious way,
trigger the deployment of eggs in females
and the production of sperm in males.
So when body fat stores are very low,
the reason why periods shut off
or sperm production is reduced or even shut off
is because there's not enough leptin
getting to the hypothalamus and to the pituitary
and they shut off the signals, the hormones,
things like gonadotropin-releasing hormone,
luteinizing hormone, follicle-stimulating hormone,
all these hormones that you don't have to remember
the names of if you don't want to,
that travel to the ovary or to the testes
and cause the ovary and testes to ovulate
or to produce more sperm.
So the reason why anorexics stop having periods,
why they stop cycling,
is because there isn't sufficient leptin
in the bloodstream.
Now, there have been attempts to give leptin to anorexics
because leptin has been sequenced
and the peptide has been synthesized
and so you can inject leptin into people.
There are studies where they've done that.
When that happens, it does not tend
to alleviate the anorexia.
It does not cause people to start eating again
and that actually makes sense
because leptin is also a way of shutting off
the hunger signals saying, it's the body fat's way
of saying, hey, there's a lot of body fat here
or there's sufficient body fat.
There doesn't even have to be a lot,
but it has in some cases been shown
to rescue the menstrual cycling in some anorexics, okay?
So body fat is signaling to the brain.
The gut is signaling to the brain.
There are neurons in your gut
that are primarily responding to,
meaning they fire electrical signals
when there are sufficient fatty acids
coming from fats you ingest,
amino acids coming from proteins you ingest
and sugars coming from carbohydrates and sugars,
things like fructose, glucose, et cetera.
Those signals are being sent from the fat
and from the gut up to the brain.
And therefore your body has multiple signals
of directing you toward eating more or eating less.
So you've got two categories of neurons,
one that acts as an accelerator,
the AGRP neuron saying eat, eat
and gets you excited to eat.
And then you have a category of neurons,
the PMOC neurons that are suppressing hunger.
They're acting like a break.
And the body is informing the brain all the time
about the status of the body
and whether or not it needs more food or not.
So you might ask, why is it that people who are overweight
and have a lot of body fat,
why they would continue to eat a lot?
Well, past a certain threshold of body fat,
that's when you start getting
into these so-called metabolic disorders
where blood glucose metabolism is disrupted,
leptin signaling is disrupted.
And there are all sorts of changes
on both the brain side and the body end of things
such that they're hungry despite the fact
that the body has plenty of energy on reserve.
Okay.
That I think is sufficient to explain
that the basics of hunger and satiety
and a kind of a biological mechanism.
And the important thing again to remember
is that they're mechanical and chemical signals
that come from fullness or absence of fullness.
They come from the presence of glucose in the blood
or the absence of glucose in the blood.
When you haven't eaten for a long time,
glucagon levels go up for instance, GLP-1 levels go up
and those will drive you to seek out food and want food.
And then there are these signals that are coming
from body fat and from neurons in the gut.
So there's a lot of convergence signal, lot of pathways.
I don't offer you all those pathways to confuse you.
I offer you those pathways to clarify the extent
to which something as simple as eating
or the decision to not eat is complicated.
We've perhaps heard, or I've certainly heard that,
oh, you know, it takes about 20 minutes
for satiety to set in, you know,
so you should eat slowly that you won't realize
that you're full until about 20 minutes.
That's actually not true.
I don't know where that got started,
but we should probably all chew our food better
and eat more slowly,
be more mindful of what we're eating, et cetera.
So in anticipation of this episode,
I consulted extensively with a colleague of mine
at Stanford, who sadly for us
is going off to University of Pennsylvania.
So our loss is University of Pennsylvania's win.
His name is Dr. Casey Halpern.
He's a MD, medical doctor and neurosurgeon
and a PhD who studies binge eating disorder
and other types of eating disorders
and how they arise in the brain.
And he's developed some really pioneering treatments
for them.
We'll talk more about his work
a little bit later in the episode,
but we got to the discussion of why a body
that has sufficient energy levels
would desire to eat more at all.
And this is not just the case for binge eating disorder
or for bulimia, but why that would be the case.
You know, this is primitive biology
that evolved over many tens,
if not hundreds of thousands of years,
you see it in mice, you see it in humans,
very similar types of pathways and effects.
How is it that human beings
who have plenty of fat on reserve
and plenty of glycogen in their liver, et cetera,
in other words, plenty of energy,
why they would be hungry, why they would eat at all?
It seems like that just shouldn't happen.
And he had a very important and I think clear
and intuitive way of framing up all this stuff
around eating and motivated behaviors
and how they can go awry,
not just in eating disorders, but in all of us.
Basically what he said was from an evolutionary standpoint,
it makes sense that we should eat as often as we can,
as much as we can, and as fast as we can.
Well, that sounds crazy.
I was told to eat not too often, not too much,
and to eat slowly and chew my food.
But as Dr. Halperin pointed out,
there are circuits in the brain to reward eating often,
eating fast and cramming as much food into you as possible.
Because from a purely evolutionary standpoint,
food was scarce and seeking food was dangerous,
whether or not it was from animal sources or not.
And it's always been competitive.
For those of you that grew up in families
with a lot of siblings, this may resonate with you.
I had just one sibling.
We were competitive about certain things,
but typically not competitive about food.
But I had friends that had a lot of siblings.
It was really interesting to see how food was served up
and how it was taken in those households.
It was like food would hit the table
and it was just an absolute war for portions.
And who got what and how much
and who got a slightly bigger piece of cake, et cetera,
turned out to be a frequent happening in these meals
and at these birthday parties.
Whereas the only children, perhaps,
were used to having more food presented to them
without having to compete with other members of the species.
Every animal, including humans,
has a hardwired circuit that we were born with
that pays attention to how much food is available,
how much we are getting now
and how much we are likely to get in the future.
And without going down the rabbit hole
of arcuate nucleus biology,
in two sentences, you have a hypothalamic area
called the arcuate nucleus.
It's a fascinating area.
It's actually the area that houses these PMOC neurons
and these other types of neurons
that regulate hunger and satiety.
And these neurons in the arcuate nucleus
start getting active when we see food and think about food.
They drive hunger and they drive hunger
in a way that's responsive to what the food looks like,
what it smells like,
but also our prior history of interactions with that food.
And it takes into account social context,
whether or not we are going to get
the whole pizza to ourselves
or whether or not there are going to be others
that we are going to have to compete with.
So there are a lot of signals that this arcuate nucleus
in your brain are paying attention to.
So Dr. Halperin pointed out
that you actually have an accelerator
that increases your level of awareness and anxiety
and sort of constricts your field of view
and all your senses anytime you interact with food
and is driving a primitive reflex
to ingest as much food as you can, as quickly as you can,
and then move on from there
and presumably to do the same elsewhere.
So that changed the way that I think about eating behavior
and eating disorders.
In fact, we could think about eating disorders
like bulimia as an unmasking of that mechanism
without the so-called top-down control,
without the mechanisms that we use to regulate our behavior.
And indeed bulimia and binge eating disorder
are closely associated with impulsivity
and with impulsive behaviors of other kinds,
something that we also will discuss more.
What's the pathway?
How does this work?
What is Dr. Halperin and his colleagues doing
in order to try and treat things like binge eating disorder?
Well, you can frame all of behavior,
good decision-making and bad decision-making
in a pretty simple box diagram model.
And I realized that many of you are listening to this,
not watching this, and there is no diagram to look at.
I'll just explain it
so that you can conceptualize it in your mind.
We have knowledge of what we should do in one box, okay?
We should eat that.
We shouldn't eat that.
We should wait for dinner.
We shouldn't wait for dinner.
And then we have what we actually do in another box, okay?
Now this is true for all behaviors.
We should say something or we want to say something,
but we don't.
We shouldn't say something, but we do anyway.
That's the knowledge, the kind of looping in your head.
I should do my homework.
I should go for a run.
I shouldn't do this right now.
I shouldn't be on social media.
All those kinds of shoulds and shouldn'ts
that are circulating in your head, that's one box.
Then there's what you actually do, the behavior,
whether or not you suppress the behavior,
you turn off your phone and you go read a book
or you go to sleep or whether or not you stay up all night
or you stay up for another hour, even five minutes.
In between those two boxes are two intervening forces.
And those intervening forces are critically important.
Those intervening forces are homeostatic processes
called by some processes, same thing.
Homeostatic processes that regulate the balance
of different systems in your body, hot and cold,
awake or asleep, dopamine and the desire to pursue things,
serotonin and the desire to just relax and chill.
So homeostatic processes and reward systems.
And as we now move into discussion
about anorexia and bulimia specifically,
what you'll see is that anorexia and bulimia
are not a breaking of the mindset
of what one should do or shouldn't do.
It's a disruption of these homeostatic and reward processes
such that decision-making is completely disrupted
and in many cases is not available
to the anorexic or bulimic.
Now, I don't want to be abstract here.
What I'm saying is that the person who starves themselves
to the point where they might die
and in some cases sadly do die,
they can know perfectly well that their behavior
is leading to bad outcomes and possibly even death.
And yet they are not able to intervene
unless they get particular clinical help
because the homeostatic processes,
the signals from the body and brain that say you need food,
those aren't registering in the same way
that they are for other individuals.
And for the bulimic or the person that suffers
from binge eating disorder,
they don't necessarily want to eat that food.
They simply cannot help it.
It's like a reflex for them
because the homeostatic processes
and the reward processes associated with food
are such that they can't intervene
between the should do X, Y, or Z,
or shouldn't do X, Y, or Z
and what their actual behavior is.
Now, this isn't just a biological mechanistic explanation
for what could have been summarized in two sentences.
What this is is a roadmap
of where interventions can really make a difference.
So as we talk about different drug-based interventions
or behavioral interventions or social interventions,
I'd like you to think about whether or not
those interventions are breaking into
or tapping into this box of the thinking,
the sort of pattern of thinking around food,
whether or not it's the behavior,
the actual ingestion or the restriction of food,
or whether or not it's tapping into the homeostatic process,
the balance of energy systems
and kind of getting enough but not too much,
or it's tapping into the reward system.
And just as a little teaser of where we're headed,
what you'll find based on the data,
clinical data experiments done very carefully
and very well by excellent groups,
what you'll find is that anorexics
have a sort of switch that's been flipped
such that their decision-making
is actually pretty darn good.
It might even be better than yours
in terms of evaluating food nutritional content,
but their habits are disrupted.
So they're not even consciously aware of the fact
that they're making terrible and in some cases,
very dangerous food choices.
It turns out that habits and the way that we build
and break and rebuild new habits
is one of the most effective treatments for anorexia.
So now let's talk about anorexia,
this failure to consume enough energy
such that the individual is at risk of death.
And if not death, then severe metabolic disorders,
lack of bone density, et cetera.
As I mentioned earlier,
anorexia and things that almost certainly were
and are anorexia have been described as early
as the 1600s and maybe even earlier.
There are some records from the saints,
from the 1400s of people that refuse to ingest food.
Another common myth is that anorexia
is only the sort of thing that you see in rich societies.
These are spoiled children with so much food
that they decided they're only going to focus
on how slim they are, how they look in bathing suits,
et cetera, not true.
A careful analysis through medical epidemiology
has shown that you find anorexia even in cultures
and societies where food is scarce.
So that really speaks to biological mechanism.
Now it's hard to unveil in societies where food is scarce
because a lot of people are starving and hungry,
but there are individuals that choose still to avoid food
and seem to have some sort of reward mechanism
that rewards them or makes them feel better
if they don't eat,
despite the fact that their body is severely depleted
of nutrients.
So that's very interesting and points again
to some disruption in some biological mechanism.
Now, I want to make sure that I'm emphasizing
that I'm not in favor of people,
in particular young children, adolescents and teenagers,
being bombarded with unrealistic imagery about bodies.
But the idea that that's the cause of,
or is amplifying anorexia,
the data just don't seem to support that.
Anorexia in its classic sense requires
that there be an endocrine, meaning a hormonal disruption,
menstrual abnormalities, lack of sperm production
or low testosterone in males,
in order to meet the classification for anorexia.
But as I mentioned earlier,
there are now nuanced and new classifications of anorexia
that even for individuals that still menstruate
or that maintain sperm production,
that anorexia can still be considered
a clinically diagnosable disorder.
Now, typically anorexia starts in adolescence
right around puberty.
Let's take a look at what puberty is.
Puberty at a very broad level is the most significant
and dramatic developmental step anyone goes through
in their lifespan.
The body changes, the brain changes, perceptions change,
one's own self perception changes.
And most of those changes are driven by changes in circuitry
within the hypothalamus.
So neurons that are controlling the production
of the so-called sex steroid hormones,
things like testosterone, estrogen, and related hormones,
prolactin, et cetera,
those are all changing at very rapid rates.
Anorexia tends to show up around this time
in a subset of individuals who on the face of it
seem to find food aversive.
Now, the purely psychological theory of this
is that they are fighting for autonomy.
They want control.
Puberty is also a time in which children and parents
are in a tug of war over control.
You were once a small child being told when to go to bed,
sent to your room.
Now you're a child that can talk back and say,
I don't want to, or I refuse to.
And that happens a lot in various households
as I'm sure you're familiar with.
Adolescence and puberty is also
when girls start menstruating typically,
or boys develop deeper voice,
they start producing sperm, et cetera.
So there are a lot of bodily changes
that also drive perceptual changes
and perceptual changes that drive bodily changes.
And it is a dramatic shift for a young girl or boy
that doesn't nourish themselves
sufficiently during that period.
There are a number of downstream negative effects.
I'll list out some of them.
These are just a subset of the effects.
Hypogonadism, that's the lack of sperm production
or healthy egg production.
There is amenorrhea, which is the lack of menstrual cycling.
Okay, so a failure to have a menstrual cycle.
Reduced insulin secretion.
Insulin is this hormone that's released
in order to help shuttle glucose
into various tissues for energy utilization.
That's down because energy levels are down so much.
One of the symptoms that's a little more cryptic
and that has actually interesting implications
for sake of the cholesterol hypothesis
is that anorexics who ingest very little food
often have cosmically high levels of cholesterol,
including LDL, low density lipoprotein cholesterol.
You say, well, how could that possibly be it?
We were all told and continue to be told from many sources
that ingestion of dietary cholesterol
is what drives high levels of bodily cholesterol.
Cholesterol is manufactured by the liver
and in anorexics who consume very little food,
they often have cosmically high levels of cholesterol,
which is one of the kind of wrinkles
in the so-called dietary cholesterol hypothesis
that all of our cholesterol that we see on a blood panel
is due to what we eat.
But the explanation for it is that under conditions
where there's not sufficient cholesterol
to synthesize the sex steroid hormones,
things like testosterone and estrogen,
which are required in both males and females,
those are made from cholesterol that the body,
the liver will start generating its own cholesterol
and will often overshoot the mark to a dramatic degree.
So the blood lipid profiles in anorexics
are often very unhealthy,
despite the fact that they're eating very little food.
In addition, they tend to have elevated levels
of things like vasopressin,
which are hormones that regulate body temperature
and salt and blood volume.
They tend to have low blood pressure.
They can pass out.
I mentioned some of the other symptoms earlier.
In other words, there are a huge number
of terrible things happening.
Thyroid levels are down.
Heart rates are down.
If I'm painting a very bleak picture here,
it is indeed a bleak picture.
So we have to ask ourselves what can be done
for the anorexic, right?
Let's say it's a failure of the AGRP neurons
to stimulate appetite and feeding.
Let's say it's too much anxiety around food.
Let's say it's because of the way that food restriction
was used for reward in the household, right?
I'm making this up,
but you can imagine a hypothetical scenario
where let's just say the mother of a particular individual
is very vocal about her avoidance of food.
We've seen this before, right?
You've probably seen somebody who loves to cook
and prepare food, but then sits down
and doesn't seem to eat.
And they always seem to, in air quotes, have eaten earlier.
I ate while I cooked.
I ate while I cooked, right?
These people that you never actually see eating.
We all know people like this.
Are they anorexic?
Possibly, we don't know.
A child observes that kind of behavior.
Maybe that individual is always being told
how beautiful they look or how wonderful or fit they look,
what incredible meals they produce.
And you could imagine a purely psychosocial set of events
that could lead a child to be anorexic.
That doesn't seem to be the case,
at least not in terms of driving classic anorexia,
of really extreme deprivation of oneself from food.
However, there's a strong genetic component for anorexia.
So you could imagine a mild form of anorexia in a parent
that is supported or exacerbated by praise
so that the person feels good
from the praise they're getting,
that they want to be a low body weight for whatever reason,
for aesthetic reasons, or for whatever reasons
that happen to appeal to them.
And the child has a genetic predisposition, right?
We never think about genes in terms of controlling behavior,
genes bias probabilities for behavior, okay?
So you can have a gene for depression or for schizophrenia,
but it's not deterministic in the same way
that there are genes that determine your eye color
or your skin color or your hair color, okay?
So there's a genetic predisposition there.
And that genetic predisposition could exist
such that if one is rewarded enough times
for a particular behavior,
that behavior can start to ratchet in
to our neural circuitry
because behavior drives neural changes,
so-called neuroplasticity.
And you could imagine that that child
could develop a full-blown case of anorexia.
And this is why I raised at the beginning
that no one really knows how to define healthy eating.
And so therefore we have to rely
on just identification of unhealthy behaviors.
But what do we point people to in terms of
what healthy replacement behaviors would be?
So rather than just look at anorexics and say,
they're not eating enough,
and there's this huge array of terrible things
that they're doing to their body and they need to eat more,
we need to rescue them from themselves.
Let's look under the hood.
Let's look at what's known about the neural circuitry
and the sorts of perceptions and behaviors
of the neural circuitry is driving
in order to understand what they are truly suffering from
at the level of cause,
not just symptoms.
It's clear what they're suffering from
at the level of symptoms.
Symptoms are how we diagnose.
I listed off a number of those things,
but let's look under the hood and try and identify
where one could intervene in theory
in order to try and rescue the anorexic
or help the anorexic rescue themselves.
Because it turns out that the answer,
or at least one of the answers of how to do that
is not intuitive at all,
at least to me was very surprising.
I would be remiss if I didn't start with the obvious,
which is, is there a chemical defect?
Meaning, is there some disruption
in one of the major chemical systems in the brain
that makes anorexics anorexic?
And therefore, can we replace that chemical
or can we reduce some chemical
and essentially eliminate anorexia?
And the answer is not really sort of, maybe no.
Here's why.
There are a lot of different chemicals
in the brain and body,
but there are a category of chemicals
that are particularly important
that if you've listened to this podcast before,
even if you haven't,
are going to come up again and again and again.
And that is the category of chemicals
in the brain and body called the neuromodulators.
Neuromodulators are different than neurotransmitters
in the sense that neuromodulators modulate
or change the activity of brain areas and neural circuits.
You can think of them as microphones
that are held between particular sets of connections
in the brain that make those connections in the brain
more likely to be active relative to others, okay?
They make them louder, so to speak.
There are many neuromodulators,
but the ones that are important
for sake of today's discussion are the classic ones,
dopamine, acetylcholine, norepinephrine, and serotonin.
Let's focus on serotonin.
Serotonin is a neuromodulator
that tends to increase the activity
of certain neural circuits,
including within the hypothalamus, but also within the body,
that trigger a sense of satiety of having enough,
enough food, enough warmth, enough social connection,
enough of any motivated goal or drive
or any type of thing or behavior
that one would want more of.
Serotonin tends to make those circuits quiet down.
Now, there are many categories of drugs
that emphasize the serotonergic circuitry,
meaning they cause the release of
or the efficiency of serotonin in the brain and body,
things like Prozac, Zoloft, Paxil, things of that variety.
Those drugs have been used to some degree of success,
although not much, to treat things like anorexia nervosa.
That should make sense
because if these drugs increase serotonin,
if their general effect is to increase serotonin,
it will be to lower anxiety.
That sounds like a great thing.
A lot of anorexics are really anxious around food.
We'll talk about why.
Lowering anxiety you might think
would lead to ingestion of more food,
but that's not often what happens.
Increasing serotonin by way of some drug regimen
will tend to make one less hungry
because with heightened levels of serotonin
in the blood and brain,
there isn't the desire to go seek out the things
that will raise serotonin on their own.
Now, some anorexics do well
or benefit from these serotonergic drugs,
these drugs that increase the activity of these circuits
that lead to satiety.
But if you think about the major goal
of treating an anorexic,
it's to get them to have more hunger, more appetite.
So now I want to focus on some of the work
that's been done around the habits
and behaviors of anorexics.
Because those turned out to be ideal places
for intervention.
The work I'm about to describe
was done by Dr. Joanna Steinglass and colleagues
at Columbia University in New York.
And there are other groups as well.
Of course, they're doing this type of work.
But they did what I think are really
some beautiful experiments
and some beautiful explorations of potential treatments
for anorexics that seem to have a quite high degree
of effectiveness when they are applied correctly.
First of all, there's a challenge in studying anorexia
because in anorexia what you're essentially studying
is the absence of a behavior.
It's very hard to study the absence of a behavior
as opposed to a behavior.
So they did some experiments with anorexics
giving them a gallery of pictures of different foods
and allowing those anorexic patients to arrange those foods
according to preference about what they would select,
about food nutrient content, about caloric content.
They essentially asked these anorexics to evaluate food.
And in doing so, they were able to identify
something that's very unique to anorexics
at the level of their perception of food.
What they found is that anorexics,
rather than being anxious in the presence of food
and that anxiety driving and avoidance of food,
what they found is that anorexics have a hyper acuity,
a hyper awareness of the fat content of foods,
almost to the point of being sort of fat content savants.
Now they don't necessarily know that they're doing this.
They're not looking at an avocado and thinking,
okay, that's X number of grams of fat rather,
or looking at an apple and saying, okay, that has no fat.
They start to do this more or less reflexively.
Now it's a well-known symptom of anorexia,
especially young anorexics that they have
kind of an obsession with food, caloric contents,
macronutrient ratios, meaning fat protein
and carbohydrate ratios.
They know caloric numbers,
but then they sort of pass that information
into a memory system in their brain
that allows their interactions with food
to be very reflexive in a way that they are actively
avoiding high fat content foods, calorie rich foods,
and defaulting towards very low calorie foods
if they have to eat.
Now, this might seem like an almost trivial result
on the face of it.
You think, okay, they don't like to eat.
When they do eat, they eat low calorie, low fat foods, duh.
But it's the way in which they are doing this subconsciously
that they learn this information
and then they pass it off to a reflexive habit.
And that's very important because what that means
is that we need to look at what processes in the brain,
what brain areas,
what chemicals drive decision-making and knowledge.
And we also need to look at the areas of the brain
that drive habit formation and habit execution.
Because for any of you that have habits,
and that means all of you,
the hallmark feature of a habit is that it's reflexive.
You have a mosquito bite on your leg, you scratch it.
You didn't necessarily even think,
oh, I'm going to scratch that.
In fact, just to take a little bit of a moment of respite
and talk about habits in general,
there's a beautiful study that was done
out of Caltech University,
looking at the parking lot of where people park
in the morning without designated parking spots
and the trajectories that they use
to walk to their offices in the morning.
So they put cameras up on the roof of Caltech.
This is the kind of thing that the nerdy kids at Caltech do.
I think at Caltech, if you call someone a nerd is,
I think it's a compliment.
So my apologies to the non-nerds at Caltech.
I think there's one or two of you.
And for the nerdy ones of you at Caltech, you're welcome.
They videotaped the behaviors of these faculty
and students and staff.
And what they found is that people follow trajectories
from their car that are remarkably stereotyped.
First of all, they tend to park always in the same spot
if they can.
They tend to get out of their car, of course,
because they're on the driver's side
or passenger side in the same place.
They turn and pivot their body
at approximately the same rate every day.
They close the door.
They put their bag on their shoulder or across their chest
or however it is that they carry their briefcase
or whatever it is.
And they follow trajectories onto campus
that are so stereotyped that you'd wonder
if you just trace line after line after line,
what you'd find is that every day is almost exactly the same
and you do this too.
You don't realize it because if you're being videotaped
during this kind of behavior,
it's not being released to you,
but your behaviors are so stereotyped to the point
where if you were to see them laid out in front of you
in kind of diagrammatic format of the lines
and the trajectories that you follow throughout the day,
the lifting of your mug and how frequently
you drink each hour, you would be amazed
and probably a little bit scared
by how much of a robot we all are.
Now that robotic aspect of our neural circuitry is vital
because it's what allows us to think about other things
and do other things and drive other behaviors.
But the work of Dr. Steinglass and colleagues showed
that in the case of the anorexic,
those habits are exactly the place
where things start to go awry
and that drive this very dysfunctional
undereating behavior that sadly often leads to death
or certainly bad medical outcomes.
And it turns out that the brain areas associated
with habit formation and execution
are the best point of intervention.
So what Dr. Steinglass and colleagues did
is they took anorexics and they of course
had control groups and they put them in an FMRI scanner,
which are these brain scanners that allow you to evaluate
which brain areas are active during particular tasks.
And because when you're in one of those scanners,
you're actually, I've actually been in one of these things,
you're biting down on a bite bar and you're most of the time
in most all of these scanners, you're immobile.
So you're looking at things on a TV screen.
Sometimes you can press buttons to select choices
and so forth, but you can't really eat within those things.
What they found was that reward-based decision-making,
the drive to pursue a particular food
or the drive to perform a particular task,
which is a lot of what we do throughout our day,
that was controlled by a brain area
called the ventromedial prefrontal cortex.
Let me simplify a little bit of this,
but I'm going to simplify it by giving you a little detail
because it's the Huberman Lab Podcast.
And I believe in mechanism.
Mechanism is the way that you get true understanding
and that you can then be very quick
and give overviews of things, but you need the mechanism.
So you have reflexes and you have neural processes
that include what are called duration path
and outcome type processes.
A duration path outcome type process,
we can shorten with DPO.
DPO is for all types of goal-related behaviors.
So for instance,
if you want to get a particular grade on an exam,
you want to learn something, you want to complete a workout,
you want to go to the grocery store and pick some stuff up
and then head home.
You're going to think duration, how long do I have?
Okay, do I have 45 minutes to get to the store?
How long does it take to get to the store?
Path, which way am I going to drive there?
Which way am I going to navigate through the grocery store?
Outcome, was I able to get in and get the items I need
and get home in time?
Okay, DPO, duration path outcome.
It's a very conscious process.
You tend to take into account different criteria
related to what's in,
what's preventing you from accomplishing what you want to do
and what's helping you or assisting you.
So of course, as you get to the checkout line
in the grocery store,
you're going to select the shortest line, for instance.
So that's all DPO stuff.
It requires decision-making and it's reward-based.
You use these DPO type processes in the short term
to pick up groceries and pick a line at the grocery store
and decide which trajectory to take home.
And you use them for navigating long extended processes
in life, trying to get a degree or raise children
or get through a particularly challenging year, et cetera.
So duration path outcome and that entire process
relies on your forebrain, this prefrontal cortex.
The prefrontal cortex is what allows you
to take information from memory,
combine it with information about what's happening
in the present context, and then to direct your behavior,
your speech, et cetera, toward particular outcomes.
And if all that sounds like a mouthful, it is,
and it's very metabolically demanding.
Decision-making is metabolically demanding.
It takes effort, okay?
Reflexes, on the other hand,
don't involve the prefrontal cortex in the same way.
Habits and reflexes, like once you know how to walk,
you get up and you walk.
You don't have to think about right foot, left foot,
right foot, left foot, you just do it.
That doesn't rely on prefrontal cortex.
It's subconscious as it's sometimes called,
but basically you don't have to use the parts of the brain
that are involved in duration path
and outcome type analysis, okay?
So in this particular study,
they examined brain activity in anorexics
who are selecting different foods.
And as I mentioned earlier,
they have a hyperacuity or awareness
of which foods contain more or less calories
than other foods and what the fat content
of particular foods is in particular, et cetera.
They're doing all this while in a scanner.
And then they look at what sorts of brain areas
are active after that task is done.
And what they found was really interesting.
What they found was that
the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, not surprisingly,
is involved in the decision-making
and the evaluation of this food,
which foods are going to be best to eat in this context,
which foods are going to be appropriate
for at least that anorexics framework
about what's okay to eat and what's not okay to eat
and how much.
However, there are areas of the brain
that were active after that decision-making process.
And those are the brain areas
that turn out to drive the habit
of avoiding particular foods and approaching other foods.
And in that case,
it wasn't the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex.
It was an area of the brain called the dorsolateral striatum.
Now, the striatum is a big area in the brain.
It's involved in a lot of different things.
It includes areas like the caudate and putatum.
And I just want to mention, as I throw out all these names,
you do not need to remember the names
of these different structures.
They're just there if you are interested
in that level of detail.
But basically you have a brain area,
and anorexics have a brain area
that's involved in evaluating
and decision-making around food.
And then another brain area
that's involved in the reflexive consumption
of particular foods
and the reflexive avoidance of other foods.
Now, if you remember way back,
the beginning of the episode,
I feel like it was a long time ago now,
when we talked about how you have these sorts
of processes in the brain,
but there are always homeostatic
and reward systems influencing this kind of thing.
Well, in the brain of the anorexic,
it turns out that the reward systems have been attached
to the execution of habits
in a way that is unhealthy for body weight.
But at least from a purely neural circuit perspective,
the reward is now given,
this chemical reward in the brain is given
for avoiding particular foods
and only approaching these very low calorie, low fat foods.
So there really does seem to be a flip in the switch
in the anorexic brain that rewards them internally.
They feel good when they avoid certain foods
and they approach others.
So it's not a deprivation based model
where they are flagellating themselves
or masochistic or actively avoiding food
in order to punish themselves,
which is interesting
because a lot of psychological theories support that idea.
Rather, once this transitions into a set of habits,
they are actually getting a sense of reward.
They feel good,
presumably from the release of a different neuromodulator
called dopamine by approaching foods
that are low fat, low calorie content.
And so their whole brain circuitry is skewed
toward avoiding particular things
and they actually are rewarded for that
and they feel good.
They feel better than if they were eating
in a healthy weight supporting way.
Now, the dorsolateral striatum is a structure
that we should think about in a little bit more depth.
It's part of a set of circuits that are involved
in what are called go, no-go tasks.
And I don't want to go into this
in a lot of detail right now
because it would take us too far down the rabbit hole
of neural circuitry.
But basically in terms of behaviors,
we both have DPO type behaviors.
So decision-making reward-based behaviors
and we have habits that we learn and we acquire
and then we just start to execute reflexively.
Things like walking, things like yawning when we're tired,
things like taking a particular route
through the parking lot, right?
We learned that the first time we go
to a given parking lot and walk into a building.
But after that, we tend to follow the exact same trajectory.
It becomes very automatized.
It's just like we just do it without thinking.
Well, the go, no-go circuitry is another aspect
of our behavior where we both have to select behaviors
to perform and we have to select behaviors to suppress.
And the anorexic brain seems to reward suppression
of one set of behaviors, ingestion of high calorie foods,
and to reward focus or even hyper-focus
and consumption of low fat, low calorie foods.
So this homeostatic process that we learn about
from like high school onward that, oh,
everything in your body is designed
to keep everything in balance.
You stay awake for a certain amount of time,
you want to sleep.
You don't eat for a while,
then you want to eat to maintain weight, right?
You eat too much, then you want to eat less.
Those systems are disrupted.
And so what's so beautiful about this work
from the Columbia group is that what it says is
the place to intervene has to be the habit.
This stuff has already passed through all the learning.
It's passed through all the reward systems.
It's clearly not being overrun
by the homeostatic processes of the body.
There's very little body fat.
There's no leptin.
Whatever neurons in the brain respond to leptin
are starved for leptin.
Periods have shut down,
sperm production and testosterone is lowered.
Bone density is down.
Clearly this is overriding all those homeostatic processes,
all the signals that would say, eat, eat, eat.
Those don't matter in the brain of the anorexic.
The brain of the anorexic is just performing habits
and they're being rewarded for it.
So when you come along and say, look,
you should really eat this whole pie or this whole pizza,
you'll feel better.
That's actually aversive to them.
So since it appears to be a habit,
a reflex that's perpetuating the anorexic phenotype,
as we say in science, it's perpetuating anorexia
in this individual and telling them about
all this terrible stuff that's happening in their body
won't work.
Taking them away from all the images of thin people online,
et cetera, that's not going to work.
What's going to work?
What's going to work is intervening in the neural circuitry
that's related to the habit itself.
And it turns out that there are ways to do that.
So how do you break a habit?
How do you rewire the brain circuitry
that's literally causing a reflex?
And in this case, causing a reflex
that is killing the individual,
or at least leading to very bad health outcomes.
The way that you do that is through a cognitive mechanism
where you teach the individual
what is leading up to the habit.
This is a little bit similar to the way that
somebody who suffers from addiction
starts to put in different constraint type behaviors.
Constraint type behaviors are the sorts of things like
where the alcoholic will call a hotel ahead of time
and say, listen, I want the mini bar taken out of the room.
I don't want a television in the room, et cetera.
Constraint type behaviors.
Those are really ways of keeping oneself from the temptation
but with these habits,
they work at such a subconscious level
that what seems to work best is a combination
of teaching the individual about their internal state
and how to register their internal state,
what we call interoception,
this ability to perceive your internal state
so that they can start to learn to associate
the interactions with different types of food
with the sorts of cues that are occurring within their body.
Quickening of heart rate, hyperacuity of focus
that we talked about earlier.
Once they start to be able to notice
that those things are happening,
then they can start to intervene.
So let's talk about what those things are
that lead into a habit
because those turn out to be the exact points of entry
for changing and eliminating and rewiring habits
toward more healthy behaviors.
And I should highlight that this isn't just about
rewiring habits for sake of the anorexic.
These are also the same types of mechanisms
that one would want to incorporate
in order to rewire any habit of any kind.
There are two main features of thinking
that go into the sorts of habits that anorexics execute.
The first is something called weak central coherence.
Weak central coherence is essentially an inability
to see the forest through the trees.
It's a hyperacuity and focus on details
within a given environment.
And there's actually an interesting probe test
for anorexia that involves something akin
to kind of a Where's Waldo type puzzle
where an image is put up.
The one that I saw was one in which
there was a big array of coffee beans, actually.
They're all brown coffee beans.
And your job is to identify where in that array
of coffee beans, there's a face.
And indeed there's a face embedded in there.
It looks a little bit like a coffee bean,
but once you see it, you realize it's a face,
not a coffee bean.
And it becomes very hard to not notice the face after that.
Anorexics are very good at identifying the face.
They find it much faster than do non-anorexics,
which is really interesting, right?
They somehow are able to hone in on details
and find those details and fixate on those details.
Now, eventually most, if not all people find the face.
But once you do, what you will find
and what everyone finds is that you can't unfind the face.
It just jumps out.
So what essentially you've lost is the ability
to see the whole picture because there's some detail
within that picture that you're obsessed by.
So this has kind of elements
of obsessive compulsive disorder,
but it's not really obsessive compulsive disorder per se.
So we call that weak central coherence.
It's a hyperacuity on one particular feature.
You miss the big picture.
The other is a challenge in set shifting
that once you identify something
that's of particular interest
and that's driving some sort of reward for the anorexic,
that would be identifying the high fat foods
or identifying the one food on the table
that one could eat without anyone hopefully noticing
that they're eating just the green beans
and not touching any of the other food.
If you ever had a meal with an anorexic,
you might be familiar with this.
It's kind of uncomfortable to be around actually.
They go through a lot of elaborate procedures
to kind of hide food, to,
they'll sometimes even chew food, hold it in their mouth
and then go to the bathroom and discard it.
Things very elaborate, very troubling types of things
to hear about and to be around.
But you'll notice that they push food
around their plate a lot.
They become masterful actually
at trying to keep people's awareness
away from what they're doing,
which is to home in on these low fat, low calorie foods.
And they can't seem to set shift.
They can't just relax and enjoy the meal
because the meal for them is essentially
like this where's Waldo
or find the face in the coffee bean task.
They're constantly monitoring
how much people are observing them
and trying to navigate this
what would otherwise be a really pleasant circumstance
for most people.
They're trying to navigate through this
because remember for them,
the reward is in the avoidance of certain things
and the acquiring of only the foods
that their brain rewards them for
because those are the foods
that have been pre-selected in our now habit.
What's amazing and frankly also important
are these findings that once you teach anorexics,
what's happening to them,
that they're doing this,
they are able to intervene.
Now they need support, right?
And another form of therapy
that seems to work well for anorexics
that ideally is combined with this habit rewiring
is a family-based model.
Family-based models are starting to surface a lot now
in various therapy settings.
Therapy-based models in short
are basically where the entire family
is made aware of the individual's challenges
with a particular eating disorder or other disorder.
And in understanding some of the biology
and psychology around it,
they stop condemning the individual.
They start to support that individual
through queuing them towards their own habits
that they observe.
They give them some autonomy.
They realize that none of this changes overnight
but they're taught about things like neuroplasticity
and the ability to change one's brain
in response to experience.
And so there's a whole internal support network.
Now for people that live alone,
this isn't available to them.
This isn't the kind of thing
that you share with your coworkers.
You might involve a close friend or a spouse
but it's not the sort of thing
that people that don't live in a family context
can really benefit from.
All of these things fall under
the umbrella of cognitive behavioral therapy.
And I should mention that cognitive behavioral therapies
are often done in conjunction with pharmacologic therapies.
I think that there's this idea out there
that it's either or when often it's both.
So cognitive behavioral therapies are often combined
with this habit recognition and rewiring approach
which is starting to become more and more common.
And I think the data on it look really good
that especially when individuals
are taught this early in adolescence,
that there are positive outcomes over time.
The relapse rate of anorexia is quite high.
It's about 50% of individuals will relapse at some point
often triggered by a stressful life circumstance.
But the combination of cognitive behavioral therapy
that includes this family model
or at least habit reformation seems to be fairly effective.
And at present might be the most effective treatment.
Now there are additional treatments starting to surface
and that takes us into the realm of chemical treatments
for anorexia and I just want to mention
that there are clinical trials,
meaning legal clinical trials being done
at Johns Hopkins School of Medicine
by Matthew Johnson and others,
exploring how drugs like MDMA,
which increases dopamine and serotonin to very high levels
or psilocybin, so-called magic mushrooms,
which increases serotonin and other compounds
to very high levels within the confines
of a professionally supported therapeutic environment
can help people rewire their brain
such that they can get relief from major depression
and various forms of trauma.
And now eating disorders are also being explored
in the context of MDMA and psilocybin clinical trials.
I do want to emphasize that those are clinical trials,
that those compounds are not yet legal.
And in many cases, most cases, they are still illegal.
I do not think that they should be explored
without a properly trained medical doctor
that the clinical trials are essential to complete
before one explores those compounds in particular,
because lately I get a lot of emails about these compounds,
people telling me that they've had amazing experiences
and relief from various things, not just eating disorders,
but depression, et cetera.
However, I get an equal number of emails from people saying
that they worked with some self-appointed guide.
This would be outside the clinical trials
I was referring to,
and they are now experiencing chronic visual snow.
They're getting genuine visual field deficits.
They are having ticks that they never had before.
They have chronic insomnia.
So I'm not passing judgment on any of these compounds
or the people that are doing this sort of thing.
I just want to see the clinical data.
And I do believe that we should wait
until these clinical trials are done
before people start approaching this stuff.
And that's because they are serious compounds.
They can open plasticity,
but whether or not they work, quote unquote,
for different types of eating disorders
or depression and trauma, the data are looking promising,
but that the clinical trials are still not done.
And I know a number of people are going out of the US
and into other countries where this stuff
is being done more regularly.
And there too, I've gotten reports back
of people doing so-called ibogaine treatments.
Some of you who are familiar with eating disorders
will immediately be asking, well, what about ibogaine?
Does it work? Does it work?
Well, the clinical trials in this country are not complete.
I've heard evidence direct.
I've heard directly from people who have benefited
from the sorts of things for treatment of eating disorders.
But I've also heard of people
that have developed chronic seizure disorders
from pursuing things like ibogaine
for the treatment of eating disorders.
So again, I'm not passing judgment.
I would just like to see more data.
And it's very important that the safety,
aspects of safety be in place.
So this is definitely not something to get renegade about.
So it appears that once anorexia is established,
that habit breaking through self-awareness
of what the habits are is going to be a primary entry point.
That might seem kind of trivial.
You might say, well,
couldn't you have just told us that in one sentence?
But I want to return us to this model
about homeostatic processes, reward processes, et cetera.
That leads us to a place where the short answer is no.
You can't simply say break the habit.
An individual needs to be informed
about where that habit comes from.
And the fact that what currently seems like a rewarded habit
should actually be a punished habit.
Now, I don't mean by actual punishment,
but what I mean is within the brain,
there's been a switch and the anorexic
needs to learn that there's been a switch
such that what should be rewarding is now punished
and what should be punished, starvation is now rewarded.
The beauty of being a human being
is that knowledge of knowledge
can allow you to make better decisions.
I'll say that again.
The beauty of being a human being
is that knowledge of knowledge
can allow you to make better decisions.
Now, of course, when we are anxious, when we are tired,
when we are intoxicated, we have less access
to that ability to use knowledge of knowledge to intervene.
The anorexic will often do things
that are in keeping with their habits,
such as over exercising.
This is a area that anyone who's treated anorexics
or interacted with anorexics is well aware of
that they are constantly moving.
They're constantly on the treadmill.
They're constantly running.
They always want to be moving and burning calories
so that they can feel okay about interacting with food
or because they have the distorted body image.
Well, does breaking a habit mean
that they should stop moving around and exercising?
No, not necessarily.
There's some really interesting studies
that show that shifting anorexics towards activities
that, for instance, build muscle resistance training
and allow them to eat a bit more food
without necessarily losing weight,
but rather to put more muscle on their body
can actually be beneficial.
Now, I'm not talking about anorexics becoming bodybuilders.
There's a whole body dysmorphia associated
with bodybuilding,
but certain forms of exercise are just catabolic,
meaning they break down the amount of muscle.
They reduce body weight overall.
Other types of exercises like resistance training
are anabolic.
They allow muscle to be put on.
And there are some interesting studies,
not a lot, but some interesting studies
trying to encourage anorexics not to stop exercising,
but rather to stop exercising in this neurotic catabolic way
of breaking oneself down,
but rather getting them shifted toward breaking habits
of only approaching low calorie, low fat foods,
while also encouraging them to embark
on resistance training
and to start to learn and reward the relationship
between exercise for sake of making one's body strong,
including the bones, not just the muscles, but the bones,
which is important, especially in anorexics,
and then to see food as a way to nourish that process,
to building a body that could be of the stable weight,
hopefully once the anorexic is of a healthy weight
that they're maintaining that weight,
but that they don't have to constantly be on this treadmill,
no pun intended,
of balancing whatever food intake they have with activity.
And along the lines of that,
during the episode on fat loss and metabolism as well,
I talked about this NEAT
and non-exercise induced thermogenesis,
where people who tend to be thin,
tend to bounce around a lot, they're kind of fidgety,
and that burns thousands of calories a day,
anywhere from 800 to 2000 calories a day.
Now that can be beneficial for the folks
that are overweight and have a healthy mindset about food,
but are trying to lose weight.
And it turns out that by literally fidgeting
and bouncing around like,
this is why I'm doing this, it looks ridiculous,
you actually burn a lot of body fat and calories that way,
provided you're in a caloric deficit,
you burn body fat,
because body fat is not just a passive tissue,
it actually receives input from neurons
that release noradrenaline and adrenaline.
And this NEAT has been described for several decades now,
and it actually is a pretty terrific way
to burn off more calories.
So with the anorexic,
you actually want to encourage them
to not constantly be trying to burn off calories,
that can be very challenging.
So shifting them toward activities
like weight-bearing activities or resistance training
that promote this more anabolic type of relationship
to activity as opposed to catabolic can be beneficial.
Before we move on to talking about bulimia
and some related disorders,
I want to talk about an aspect of anorexia
that's very interesting, quite troubling in fact,
but that has received a lot of attention,
and that's the distorted self image.
Now, in the episode on depression,
we talked about a very powerful aspect of major depression,
which is this anti-self-confabulation
that people who are depressed seem to genuinely believe
and even confabulate about the fact
that they are performing poorly in life
and that they are no good or worthless, et cetera.
It's literally a lie that they believe
and their statements and their feelings
and their behaviors start to reflect that lie.
They're not conscious of it.
That's why we call it a confabulation.
Anorexics often will see themselves as overweight
or imperfect in ways that are of an obsession for them.
They'll think, oh, you know,
their arms are a little bit fat, you know,
or, you know, the contour of their face makes,
they don't like the pictures of themselves or they,
what I'm describing here is actually pretty typical behavior
of a lot of people.
I mean, how many people do you know
that after you take a picture of them,
they say, can I see the picture?
And then they tell you that you have to throw it away.
That doesn't necessarily mean they're anorexic
or they're suffering from some sort of disorder.
That just means that they're a human being
that cares about how they appear in the world.
We're not here to judge that.
In the case of the anorexic,
the problem seems to be that they have a genuine distortion
of their self-image so much so
that they don't actually see themselves accurately.
Their visual perceptions are off.
And the reason we know this
or it's because of some really important
and beautiful studies that were done
in my colleague Jeremy Bailenson's lab at Stanford.
He's in the department of communications.
He's actually collaborated with a Dr. Halpern
that I mentioned earlier.
What's really interesting about these studies
is they give us a window into the perceptual defect
that anorexics have.
I've actually done one of these experiments.
I'm fortunate to not be anorexic,
but I've done some work with the VR lab over there.
And what you get to do is you get to adjust
this avatar of yourself to the point
where you think it's as accurate as it could possibly be.
And anorexics really distort this avatar.
In other words, they create this serious mismatch
between their perception of themselves and the reality.
So indeed it does seem to be the case.
Now what's relieving, or I should say what's encouraging
about some of the therapies that we talked about before,
the family-based model, the cognitive behavioral treatments,
yes, and the drug treatments as well,
but this habit intervention model
is that as one starts to shift those things,
it does appear that the perception of self seems to follow,
that the perception of self seems to shift
along with the change in habits.
And that's a relief, at least I find that reassuring
because changing one's perception is actually very hard.
As somebody who's worked almost his entire career
on visual perception and related things,
the perceptual apparatus of the brain
are not very amenable to neuroplasticity.
Mainly they don't change that easily.
Whereas it appears that the circuitry
that's related to habit formation and decision-making
and the reward circuitry, that stuff can be rewired.
And so anorexics,
as they progress out of their anorexic state
into one which they are intervening in their reflexes,
gaining better habits around food,
eating more accurately, assessing foods and environments
that they're in related to food,
as they change their behavior
and they start to put on healthy weight,
maybe they're also doing the sorts of exercises
that allow them to put on healthy weight
and avoiding kind of extreme exercises of catabolism
and breaking themselves down.
They also manage to somehow,
just as a consequence of all that,
rewire their perception of self.
So it doesn't seem that trying to tell someone,
oh my gosh, you're so thin, you really need to eat,
that doesn't seem to work.
They just don't see themselves the same way
that you see them.
And so I offer that as a point of consideration
if you know someone that's anorexic
or if you look at an anorexic and you think,
how is it that they are still critical of the small,
even non-existent amount of body fat
on their triceps or something, how is that?
Well, it's literally that their brain,
as it relates to perceptions,
visual perceptions in particular,
that they're completely off.
And fortunately, by changing habits,
you rewire those circuits as well.
Okay, so let's talk about bulimia,
which is overeating and then purging,
typically by self-induced vomiting
or by ingestion of laxatives,
sometimes also in concert with people taking stimulants
and fat burners and over-ingestion of stimulants
to try and burn off more energy.
And then we'll also talk about binge eating disorder,
which has a lot of the same features as bulimia,
but typically no purging.
I'm not going to list off all the clinical criteria
that would allow someone to be diagnosed
as bulimic or binge eating disorder.
But the general features are that they ingest
far more calories than they need,
anywhere from 10 to 30 times their daily caloric intake,
oftentimes within a two-hour period,
which is just a staggering amount of food and nutrients
in a short period of time.
Oftentimes they're overriding those mechanical signals
from the body that they're full.
It's a really troubling thing to think about,
but people are literally gorging themselves with food.
This looks a lot like a laboratory animal
that has these AGRP neurons stimulated,
these neurons that will eat until they almost burst
or burst.
So you wonder, is it these AGRP neurons that are active?
Almost certainly, yes, that they're involved.
Although I don't think that that's going to be
the major point of intervention,
that we're going to talk about other types of interventions.
There are a number of clinical criteria.
For instance, if somebody has one of these binges
once a year, does that make them bulimic?
Technically, no, but I certainly don't recommend
people do this.
If you are one of these people
who has so-called cheat days, right?
Some of you may be familiar with cheat days.
I think they're a little less common now,
but the idea is you eat clean for six days
or five days a week or two weeks,
and then you have a so-called cheat day
where you just kind of go wild and eat whatever you want
and whatever volumes.
Is that bulimia? It has some of the contour of bulimia.
If you're vomiting afterwards or binge eating disorder,
if you're not, does it constitute full blown bulimia
or binge eating disorder?
It's pretty hard to say.
The criteria that were described to me
is that if somebody is doing this at least once a month
over a period of anywhere from two to three months,
then it likely would qualify.
And I certainly know people who do these cheat days
and by those criteria,
they have something like binge eating disorder.
But in general, one of the hallmark features
of bulimia and binge eating disorder
is that people are unable to control their eating.
They're just simply,
they're not making the decision to have a cheat day.
They're not making the decision to overeat.
They are simply driven from the inside
without question by way of neural circuitry.
They are driven from the inside
to ingest far more food than they need.
And in some cases, then they would want to eat.
So it's a lot like the habit
that we described for anorexia.
It's almost like it's turned into a reflex
once they get going.
All the homeostatic signals are being overridden.
All the signals from the body, the leptin,
the insulin, the glucose,
all that stuff is cosmically sky high.
And yet they're just what the nerds call hyperphagic.
They're just eating like crazy.
So what's going on there?
Well, there've been a lot of ideas, you know,
about why this arises.
There's the so-called thyroid hormone hypothesis.
That one's a tricky one.
It turns out that cortisol
and thyroid hormone concentrations vary
according to when the binge purge happened.
So there were some studies
that looked at thyroid hormone levels
and they found elevated thyroid hormone levels.
Thyroid hormone is involved in metabolism
and not just the burning of energy,
but the use of energy in converting it
to different tissues of the body,
cartilage, bone, fat, and muscle, et cetera.
Did a whole episode on thyroid and growth hormone,
by the way, if you're interested
in learning more about thyroid hormone.
But thyroid hormone can also be depleted
at other phases of the binge purge cycle.
Now, without listing off all the terrible things
that happen with this binge purge cycle,
there are a number of things
that are really worth pointing out.
One is that the vomiting itself, the use of laxatives,
that can cause severe disruption to the mucosal lining,
the mucus lining of the digestive tract,
can severely disrupt the gut microbiome.
It can cause all sorts of even ulceration of the esophagus
and just really terrible stuff.
There's a lot of shame associated with bulimia,
oftentimes because people are vomiting
and it's hard to hide that vomiting behavior.
People are aware of it.
There's some social isolation.
So you recall from the beginning,
it does not appear that sexual trauma
is a prerequisite for bulimia,
although sometimes it can occur.
The hallmark feature of bulimia
that distinguishes it from anorexia,
aside from the fact that it's overeating
as opposed to undereating,
is a lack of what they call inhibitory control.
And that might come as no surprise.
But first of all, the bulimic, unlike the anorexic,
is hyper impulsive
and oftentimes has other types of impulse behaviors.
They might have a little bit of alcohol
and then start to eat like crazy,
whereas normally they're very restrictive.
That's a common feature of bulimia.
Sometimes they over ingest alcohol during these binges.
Sometimes they are sexually promiscuous, not always,
but it's a general issue with satiety
once they start eating
and with impulse control generally.
And for that reason,
many of the treatments that you see for bulimia
and binge eating disorder
are the sorts of treatments that don't seem to work so well,
or at least most of the time for anorexia.
So the drugs that increase the neuromodulator serotonin,
for instance, fluoxetine,
also called Prozac, Paxil, et cetera,
those things oftentimes can be effective in bulimia.
Some of the drugs that are used to treat
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and ADD,
a topic that we're going to talk about in depth
here on the podcast soon,
some of those same drugs like Adderall,
Vyvanse and things of that sort
can also be used to treat bulimia and binge eating disorder.
Why would that work?
Well, now you are familiar with the prefrontal cortex.
You probably know more about prefrontal cortex
than you ever wanted to.
Just from this episode,
prefrontal cortex is involved in this analysis
of duration, path and outcome.
Duration, path and outcome is how we avoid impulsivity.
It's how we think, okay, if this, then that,
if that, then this,
you can imagine how for the obsessive compulsive
or for the anorexic,
these are circuits that are overactive.
For the bulimic,
this is the circuit that's going to essentially
be underactive and is under conditions where they think,
oh, you know, I shouldn't eat anything.
I shouldn't eat anything.
And then they just tear the refrigerator open
and plow through that.
And then at that point they're plowing through the cupboards
and then they're ordering food
and then they're feeling horrible about themselves.
There do tend to be these cycles of binge and purge
followed by feelings of real shame
because they just can't control their behavior.
And what is more embarrassing
than not being able to control one's behavior as an adult
or as a young adult.
So really the polar opposite of what you see
in anorexia.
So this lack of impulsivity
implies a lack of prefrontal control,
what we call top-down control.
Why do we call it top-down?
Because the prefrontal cortex is suppressing the activity
of deeper limbic and hypothalamic circuitry
and things of that sort.
Anytime you feel like you want to say something
really offensive and you don't,
that's top-down control.
That's your prefrontal cortex.
Anytime someone says something and you like,
like grit your teeth,
cause you know you shouldn't say anything,
gritting your teeth is top-down control.
Okay?
When you explode or burst or say the wrong thing
or say the thing that you shouldn't say
or do the thing you shouldn't do,
that's lack of prefrontal control.
And indeed people who have frontotemporal dementia
due to aging or head injuries see this a lot
and people play sports that get a lot of frontal damage,
they become more impulsive.
So bulimics have an issue with impulsivity
and therefore drugs that can increase serotonin
and sometimes these drugs that increase dopamine
and adrenaline also called epinephrine
will increase the tone as we call it,
the dopaminergic tone or the norepinephrine,
it's called adrenergic,
but norepinephrine levels in the brain
allow for more top-down control.
And that's also why they're used to treat ADHD
and attention deficit disorder.
They tend to create a hyper-focus.
They tend to push the brain into,
these drugs tend to create a hyper-focus
and tend to push the brain and general mode of processing
into one in which you think, if this, then that,
if this, then that.
So anticipating outcomes.
And for that reason, drugs like Wellbutrin, Bupriarone,
which is an antidepressant,
which mainly increases the amount of dopamine
and norepinephrine and less so serotonin,
that can also be effective
for certain types of binge eating disorder
and is actually used to treat smoking
for promoting smoking cessation and for depression,
but also for certain forms of obesity
related to binge eating disorder.
And the data are pretty good
and there are timed release forms of this
and non-timed release forms.
And I think you have to consult with a psychiatrist
in order to get these prescribed
because they are prescription drugs,
but it's a very different constellation of neurochemicals
and brain areas and approaches for bulimia.
The treatment of binge eating disorder
has been explored from a new standpoint recently,
and that's the work of this now, sadly,
former colleague of mine, Dr. Casey Halpern,
who's at University of Pennsylvania
that I mentioned earlier.
They are using deep brain stimulation
in order to treat binge eating disorder.
Now, why deep brain stimulation?
Well, work from Dr. Halpern and others while at Stanford
showed that there are particular patterns of brain activity
in both the prefrontal cortex,
but also in an area of the brain
called the nucleus accumbens,
very important and very relevant area of the brain
in this context.
And in any discussion about motivated behaviors of any kind,
feeding, sex, drug related behavior,
people exercise compulsively,
the nucleus accumbens is in a ongoing dialogue
with the prefrontal cortex.
And the nucleus accumbens has no mind of its own,
but it's associated with dopamine release.
It's part of this so-called reward pathway.
And what Dr. Halpern and colleagues discovered
is that there are particular patterns of activity
that ripple through the brain
through these prefrontal networks
and through this nucleus accumbens area,
those areas are connected.
It's called delta oscillations,
delta just being a particular frequency
of electrical activity for you,
aficionados is one to four Hertz activity.
But in any case, those delta oscillations
in the nucleus accumbens are associated with food reward
in both mice and humans.
Somehow this reverberatory activity
creates a perception in the individual
that food is hyper rewarding.
That's interesting and has allowed them to use
a targeted deep brain stimulation approach
to treat binge eating disorder.
And this deep brain stimulation
is appearing to be an effective treatment.
There's still more studies that need to be done.
Actually, if you think you have binge eating disorder,
you can find the criteria for that
and you could contact Dr. Halpern.
As I mentioned, he's moving to University of Pennsylvania.
They are recruiting patients for these studies all the time.
The studies are fairly invasive.
They involve a FDA approved approach
of literally placing a wire down into an area of the brain
that then allows the individual
to stimulate a particular brain area
to offset some of these activity patterns
that lead to a elevated sense of reward
from food and binge eating.
And the data look really promising.
Now I realize that's a very invasive approach.
Not everybody is going to be willing
to have this wire inserted into the brain,
but for people that suffer from binge eating disorder,
this is a great and very exciting potential treatment
because what I didn't tell you
is that many people have binge eating disorder are obese
to the point where their health is greatly at risk.
Now, obesity causes all sorts of shifts
in the dialogue between the brain and body,
some of which you'll recognize
from earlier in the discussion.
For instance, leptin signaling is disrupted.
So the fat, there's lots of body fat,
but even though that body fat
is secreting this hormone leptin
and that signal should shut down the desire to eat,
the receptors to leptin in the brain are totally screwed up.
And so the signal to eat is there,
but the signal to stop eating is not there.
So again, you have an accelerator and a brake
and it's like the accelerator is always pushed down.
Some of these brain stimulation approaches
seem to be able to bypass some of that.
And of course, there are all the metabolic syndromes
and the problems with having excess levels of body fat,
things like insulin resistance, type two diabetes.
I mean, as disturbing as is to hear,
there are many individuals, actually,
I know some who are so obese
that they start getting bodily sores.
They're not just bed sores,
but they have skin sores that are very disruptive to them.
They don't like having these sores.
And in addition to that,
they can get peripheral neuropathies
because of some of these metabolic issues,
they're not getting enough utilization of the nutrients
in the tissue because the way that insulin is disrupted,
insulin signaling, and they actually have to have
certain portions of their limbs amputated
and yet they continue to overeat.
So this is not an issue of self-control
that can easily be dealt with
simply by telling the person, look,
you have to stop eating or you're going to die
or you're going to have your legs amputated.
Like with anorexia,
there's a distortion in the relationship to food,
but the homeostatic and the reward aspects are disrupted.
So unlike anorexia,
where it seems to be a habit-based mechanism,
with bulimia and binge eating disorder,
something deep within the neural circuitry
is causing food to be hyper attractive
and the break is off.
So if you want to develop some empathy
for what these people are dealing with, consider this.
It's like driving a car.
You get onto a grade, maybe a 10 or 15 degree grade,
and you're heading down and you figure,
well, you'll just pump the brakes a little bit,
but there is no break, right?
So you start going faster and faster and faster,
and your only choice is to use the accelerator
or just to coast through it.
That's essentially what's happening to these neural circuits.
So the work of Dr. Halpern and others,
I think is really exciting.
And even though it's highly invasive,
I think it's going to lead to
not just some relief for the patients
that do get that deep brain stimulation,
but also the identification of what sorts of receptors
are present in those brain areas
that could help.
What that means is that once we understand
which brain areas are involved in the disorder,
and we understand what receptors those brain areas express,
then there can start to be additional interventions
by way of non-invasive treatments,
things like drug treatments.
Do behavioral interventions work for bulimia?
In some cases, yes,
provided that those interventions are done early enough.
Regardless, behavioral interventions
coupled with drug-based interventions
are always more effective than either one alone.
Fortunately, there is a decent size kit of drugs
that can help with bulimia.
I mentioned some of them before,
things like buprenorphine, wellbutrin,
some of the serotonergic drugs,
and some of the drugs used to treat impulsivity.
So we have on the one hand anorexia,
which seems to be a disruption in habit
and a coupling of unhealthy habits,
in this case, food restriction,
to the reward pathway.
And on the flip side,
we have binge eating disorder and bulimia,
where a very unhealthy habit of gorging oneself with food,
sometimes followed by purging,
is not necessarily coupled to reward.
They feel terrible when they do that, right?
The anorexic feels great about restricting their food intake.
They feel like they're winning some sort of game.
The circuitry is flipped somehow that way.
With bulimia, they feel horrible about the fact
that they're binging.
There's immense shame.
They can't control themselves.
The reward is set up before the behavior.
The reward is set up in drawing them to food
and in making food look like something
that's incredibly appetizing,
and there's no impulse break.
There's no way for them to stop that kind of behavior.
So a really kind of troubling thing to think about,
in either case, I think for those of us that know anorexics
or have observed anorexia,
it's so hard to see somebody starve themselves
to near death or to death.
What more could be disturbing?
Well, equally disturbing is somebody who has an abundance
of food and is gorging themselves
and then feels terrible about it.
So these are heavy topics.
These are topics that frankly,
no one really wants to talk about
unless they know someone who's suffering from them
or they themselves suffer from them.
What I've tried to do today is try and give you a window
into what really underlies these things
that we call eating disorders.
I hope I've done that at the level of biology,
neurocircuitry, mechanism, endocrinology,
and some of the psychology.
As with any episode of this podcast,
but especially in this month
where we're talking about mental health issues
and mental health disorders, behavioral disorders,
there's no way that I can exhaustively cover
all the different forms of treatment.
You have the model approach.
You've got all these different approaches
to depression and to anorexia, et cetera.
What I've tried to do is give you a framework.
And in doing that,
I've tried to give you a framework of understanding
that also applies to this question
that's I think equally important
and goes alongside the treatment of eating disorders
is what in the world is healthy eating?
What in the world is a healthy relationship to food?
I like to think that I have a healthy relationship to food.
I know the foods I like, I enjoy them.
There are 10 or 15 foods in particular
that I like very much.
I've mentioned a few of them on the podcast before
and was sort of amused, surprised, and perplexed
as to why, for instance, I do enjoy eating butter,
not in huge amounts, but I do like butter.
So that seemed to be pretty triggering
for folks out there.
A small selection of people decided
that the ingestion of butter was a health concern.
Look, to me, ingesting butter in small quantities
is something that I'm comfortable with
and my blood lipid profiles feel good.
They look good to me.
For other people, that might not be the case.
For some people, the idea of eating an animal-based food
is probably so repulsive
that it actually can make them feel physically sick.
And I think that we should be aware
that that kind of mental phenotype exists.
I'm not calling it a pathology.
For other people like myself,
things like butter and meat feel healthy.
Now, what quantities?
Well, I enjoy eating very much.
I'm not shy about this.
I've talked about it in the podcast before.
I enjoy eating.
Some people have a very complicated relationship to food.
They don't think of it as nourishment.
They don't enjoy it socially.
It's a stressful thing for them
based on their personal history
or maybe just general anxiety around food.
And I hope that in sharing this information
about the fact that anytime we approach food,
these neurons in the arcuate area of our hypothalamus
actually increase our levels of anxiety.
This is related to that point that Dr. Halpern made,
which was that from an evolutionary standpoint,
it is advantageous to ingest as much food
as often as possible, as quickly as possible.
We now know that to not be healthy in this age of abundance
where calories are essentially everywhere.
And yet a lot of people feel anxious
in anticipation of a meal.
What could be useful to them?
Well, whether or not they have an eating disorder or not,
it's very clear that developing methods to calm oneself
in the presence of any anxiety or fear inducing stimulus
can be beneficial.
I've talked about some of these
in episodes related to stress,
things like the physiological side,
two inhales through the nose and a long exhale.
Things like mindfulness meditation certainly can help.
There are data, a lot of studies out there
showing that meditation practice can help people deal with
eating related anxiety and disorders.
I think as a general rule,
trying to avoid approaching a meal or sitting down to eat
in an anxious state is probably a good idea,
but let's be realistic.
How often can we do that?
I think most of us are going to have circumstances
where we're rushing around trying to just eat
before we head out or get to a meal.
And then we sit down and we find ourselves eating.
This is one of the first times in human evolution
where we mostly eat out of a desire to consume food,
not out of a need for food.
Most everybody could go a fairly long period of time
just ingesting water and electrolytes
and not that I'm suggesting people do that,
but let's face it.
We largely eat nowadays because of a desire to eat,
not a need to eat.
And yet we need to eat on a fairly regular basis.
And so no topic is more complicated and nuanced
than food and nutrition.
And in particular, as it relates to eating disorder.
So the major takeaways today are,
we should all be asking the question,
what is healthy eating for us?
How do we develop a relationship to food
that we can enjoy food,
hopefully both socially and on our own,
but that we are not neurotic and compulsive about it.
For those of you that intermittent fast,
this also applies, right?
What, you know, God forbid,
if you eat 30 minutes before your eating window starts,
what does that mean?
If it means something catastrophic,
do you have an eating disorder?
I don't know, maybe you have an anxiety disorder.
That's for you to explore.
If you don't manage to eat five meals a day
and that's your obsession,
well then, you know, the same thing applies.
These are questions that we can all ask ourselves.
Today, we focus on the extremes of food-related behaviors
that really qualify as genuine disorders.
They are in the psychiatric manuals and they are diagnosable
and they are serious health concerns.
They're not just mentally troubling and concerning
for the people suffering from them
and the people around them,
but they are genuine health concerns.
Just want to reiterate that anorexia nervosa
is the most deadly psychiatric disorder by a huge margin.
And if you look statistically at the number of people
with eating disorders and that die of eating disorders,
it's not far off from the number of people
that die from automobile accidents.
I know that that sounds like a ridiculous number,
but you can look this up.
This is particularly true in certain countries.
Why that is, we don't know.
But again, this is not a new phenomenon.
This is not just related to body image issues
that are created through social media and media.
And as a final point on that, many of you
are probably asking, what about plastic surgery?
What about all the steps that people are going to through,
excuse me, to preen themselves and change themselves?
Are people addicted to plastic surgery?
Is that a form of body dysmorphia?
And indeed it is.
And so we will do an episode on exercise-related
and plastic surgery-related body dysmorphia.
I think there is very little question
that those types of disorders are clearly related
to what we're observing in social media and in media,
that this shift of, for instance, action heroes,
if you look at action heroes in the 80s,
there were very few men that were very large.
You had your Stallone's and your Schwarzenegger's
and a few others, but the men in movies tended to be,
if they were muscular, they were far more svelte
than they are now.
There's this kind of, there's literally a hypertrophy
of the imagery.
And likewise, there's been hypertrophy
of the female body shape as it's portrayed in the media.
There are body dysmorpheas that are related
to those types of things and that relate to things
like plastic surgery, steroid abuse, diet drug abuse,
and so on.
Definitely important to think about and consider
and definitely deserving of its own episode.
You've learned a lot of neuroscience today.
I hope that was useful in thinking
about these disorders and in thinking about other aspects
of feeding and motivated behaviors.
I would love for you to take away this model
that was handed off to me that I think is so powerful
for thinking about all sorts of things, not just eating,
but all kinds of behaviors and perceptions
that you have one box for what you think,
one box for what you do,
and what is intervening between those?
Why is it that you can know better and not do better?
Well, it's because you also have to cope
with the subconscious homeostatic processes
and reward processes.
And those oftentimes can be disrupted in ways
that we find ourselves doing things that are not good
for us or not good for other people.
But fortunately there is this great gift,
which is that knowledge of knowledge can allow you
to do better without question.
And that knowledge of knowledge allowing you
to do better over time leads
to this incredible phenomenon called neuroplasticity,
which essentially is translated
into doing better over time, even if difficult,
eventually makes doing better reflexive.
If you're enjoying this podcast and learning from it,
please subscribe to our YouTube channel.
That's Huberman Lab on YouTube.
And there you can also leave us comments and feedback
and suggestions for future topics and future guests
for the Huberman Lab podcast.
As well, we hope that you will subscribe
on both Apple and Spotify.
And on Apple, you have the opportunity to leave us
up to a five-star review
and to give us feedback there as well.
Please also check out the sponsors mentioned
at the beginning of the podcast.
That's a terrific way to support the podcast.
And if you'd like to support research on stress,
human performance, sleep, and so forth,
you can go to Hubermanlab.stanford.edu.
And there there's a tab that you can click
if you'd like to make a tax deductible donation
to the laboratory to explore the sorts of things
that relate to neural circuits, stress,
sleep, and human performance.
Not today, but oftentimes on this podcast,
we discuss various compounds and supplements
that people could possibly take in order to help deal
with anxiety, improve gut microbiome,
improve their sleep, et cetera.
We didn't discuss those today,
but for those of you interested in those compounds,
if you want to see the ones that I take,
you can go to Thorne, that's T-H-O-R-N-E.com
slash the letter U slash Huberman.
So it's Thorne.com slash U slash Huberman.
See all the supplements that I take,
you get 20% off any of those supplements.
And if you enter the Thorne site through that portal,
you can get 20% off any of the supplements that Thorne makes.
We partnered with Thorne
because they have the highest levels of stringency
with respect to the quality of ingredients,
the precision of the amounts of those ingredients.
And while supplements are certainly not required
or necessary for anything really,
you can always use behavioral tools.
Many people benefit from taking supplements of various kinds
and we do believe that getting supplements
of the very highest quality is going to be important
if that's the decision for you.
And last but not least,
I want to thank you for your time and attention
and thank you for your interest in science.
Thank you for your time and attention and thank you for your time and attention.